Self-determination for Indigenous Peoples is critical for effective adaptation in Indigenous communities (very high confidence). Throughout North America, Indigenous Peoples are actively addressing the compound impacts of climate change, and historical and ongoing forms of colonialism (very high confidence). Indigenous knowledge underpins successful understanding of, responses to, and governance of climate-change risks. Western scientific practices and technology may not be sufficient in addressing future natural resource management challenges. Supporting Indigenous self-determination, recognising Indigenous Peoples’ Rights, and supporting adaptation underpinned by Indigenous knowledge are critical to reducing climate-change risks to achieve adaptation success (very high confidence). {14.7.3, Box 14.1}Equitable, inclusive and participatory approaches that integrate climate-impact projections into near- and long-term decision making reduce future risks (high confidence). Government and private investment are increasingly focusing on early warning and rapid response systems, climate and ecological forecasting tools, and integrated climate scenario planning methods. Widespread adoption of these practices and tools for infrastructure planning, disaster risk reduction, ecosystem management, budgeting practices, insurance, and climate risk reporting supports planning for a future with more climate risks (high confidence). Increased capacity to support the equitable resolution of existing and emerging resource disputes (local to international) will reduce climate impacts on livelihoods and improve the effectiveness of resource management (high confidence). {14.5.5, 14.5.10, 14.7}Near- and long-term adaptation planning, implementation and coordination across sectors and jurisdictions supports equitable and effective climate solutions (high confidence). Recognition of the need for adaptation across North America is increasing, but action has been mostly gradual, incremental and reactive (high confidence). Current practices will be increasingly insufficient without coordination and integration of efforts through equitable policy focused on modifying land-use impacts, consumption patterns, economic activities and emphasising NbS (high confidence). Transformational, long-term adaptation action that reduces risk and increases resilience can address rapidly escalating impacts in the long-term, especially if coupled with moderate to high mitigation measures (high confidence). {14.7}