Sea level changearises from processes acting on a range of spatial and temporal scales, in the ocean, cryosphere, solid Earth, atmosphere and on land (Figure 9.2). Relative sea level (RSL) change is the change in local mean sea surface height relative to the sea floor, as measured by instruments that are fixed to the Earth’s surface (e.g., tide gauges). This reference frame is used when considering coastal impacts, hazards and adaptation needs. In contrast, geocentric sea level change is the change in local mean sea surface height with respect to the terrestrial reference frame, and is the sea level change observed with instruments from space. This box provides a brief summary of sea level processes using standard terminology (Gregory et al., 2019).Global processesGlobal mean sea level change (Sections 9.6 and 2.3.3.3) is the change in volume of the ocean divided by the ocean surface area. It is the sum of changes in ocean density (‘global mean thermosteric sea level change’) and changes in the ocean mass as a result of changes in the cryosphere or land-water storage (‘barystatic sea level change’).Steric sea level change is caused by changes in the ocean density and is composed of ‘thermosteric sea level change’ and ‘halosteric sea level change’. Thermosteric sea level   change  (also referred to as ‘thermal expansion’) occurs as a result of changes in ocean temperature: increasing temperature reduces ocean density and increases the volume per unit of mass. Halosteric sea level change occurs as a result of salinity variations: higher salinity leads to higher density and decreases the volume per unit of mass. Although both processes can be relevant on regional to local scales, thermosteric changes contribute to global mean sea level change, whereas global mean halosteric change is negligible (Gregory et al., 2019). There is  high confidence in the understanding of processes causing thermosteric sea level change (Section 9.2.4.1).The Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets   are the largest reservoirs of frozen freshwater and therefore potentially the largest contributors to sea level rise. Fluctuations in ice-sheet volume arise from the imbalance between accumulation (either at the ice-sheet surface or on the underside of ice shelves) and loss from sublimation, surface and basal melting, and iceberg calving. Ice sheets discharge the majority of their mass through marine-terminating ice streams that are in some cases buttressed by floating ice shelves. Changes in the thickness and extent of the ice shelves due to melt from below, calving, or disintegration, as a result of surface meltwater penetrating crevasses, can affect the flow of the inland ice streams. There is medium confidence in ice-sheet processes but low confidence in their forcing (ocean changes and ice-shelf collapse) and in instability processes (Sections 9.4.1 and 9.4.2). 3Glaciers contribute to sea level change via an imbalance between mass gain and mass loss processes, which leads to adjustments in the glacier geometry over an extended period of time, called the response time. The response time may range from a few years to a few hundred years. The glacial meltwater does not all flow immediately into the ocean: it can refreeze, feed rivers (where it may be extracted for domestic use), evaporate, or be stored in (proglacial) lakes or closed basins. There is medium to  high confidence in the understanding of processes leading to sea level contributions from glaciers (Section 9.5.1).Land-water storage includes surface water, soil moisture, groundwater storage and snow, but excludes water stored in glaciers and ice sheets. Changes in land-water storage can be caused either by direct human intervention in the water cycle (e.g., storage of water in reservoirs by building dams in rivers, groundwater extraction for consumption and irrigation, or deforestation) or by climate variations (e.g., changes in the amount of water in internally drained lakes and wetlands, the canopy, the soil, the permafrost andthe snowpack). Land-water storage changes caused by climate variations may be indirectly affected by anthropogenic influences. It is difficult to assign a single confidence level to land-water storage as understanding can vary from low confidence in groundwater recharge processes to  high confidence in water storage via snowpack changes (Sections 8.2.3 and 8.3.1.7).Regional and local processesOcean dynamic sea level   change refers to the change in mean sea level relative to the geoid and is associated with the circulation and density-driven changes in the ocean. Ocean dynamic sea level change varies regionally but by definition has a zero global mean. It includes the depression of the sea surface by atmospheric pressure. There is medium confidence in the understanding of ocean processes leading to dynamic sea level change (Section 9.2.4.2).Changes in Earth gravity, Earth rotation and viscoelastic solid Earth deformation  (GRD) – result from the redistribution of mass between terrestrial ice and water reservoirs and the ocean. Contemporary terrestrial mass loss leads to elastic solid Earth uplift and a nearby RSL fall. (For a single source of terrestrial mass loss, this is within about 2000 km; for multiple sources, the distance depends on the interaction of the different RSL patterns.) Farther away (around more than 7000 km for a single source of terrestrial mass loss), RSL rises more than the global average, due to first-order gravitational effects. Earth deformation associated with adding water to the ocean and a shift of the Earth’s rotation axis towards the source of terrestrial mass loss leads to second-order effects that increase spatial variability of the pattern globally. GRD effects due to the redistribution of ocean water within the ocean itself are referred to asself-attraction and loading effects. There is  high confidence in the understanding of GRD processes.Glacial isostatic adjustment  is ongoing GRD in response to past changes in the distribution of ice and water on Earth’s surface. On a time scale of decades to tens of millennia following mass redistribution, Earth’s mantle flows viscously as it evolves toward isostatic equilibrium, causing solid Earth movement and geoid changes, which can result in regional to local sea level variations. There is medium confidence in the understanding of glacial isostatic adjustment processes.Vertical land motion is the change in height of the land surface or the sea floor and can have several causes in addition to elastic deformation associated with contemporary GRD and viscoelastic deformation associated with glacial isostatic adjustment. Subsidence (sinking of the land surface or sea floor) can occur through compaction of alluvial sediments in deltaic regions, removal of fluids such as gas, oil, and water, or drainage of peatlands. Tectonic deformation of the Earth’s crust can occur as a result of earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. There is medium confidence in the understanding of vertical land motion processes.Extreme sea level   is an exceptionally low or high local sea surface height arising from combined short-term phenomena (e.g., storm surges, tides and waves). RSL changes affect extreme sea levels directly by shifting the mean water levels, and indirectly by modulating the depth for propagation of tides, waves and/or surges. Extreme sea levels can be influenced by changes in the frequency, tracks, or strength of weather systems, or anthropogenic changes such as dredging. Extreme still water level refers to the combined contribution of RSL change, tides and storm surges. Wind-generated waves also contribute to coastal sea level. Extreme total water level   is the extreme still water level plus wave setup (time-mean sea level elevation due to wave energy dissipation). When considering coastal impacts, swash (vertical displacement up the shore-face induced by individual waves) is also important and included in Extreme coastal water level. There is low to medium confidence in the understanding of extreme sea level processes (Sections 9.6.4 and 12.4).