The chapter is mapped into seven sections. Cost and potentials of mitigation technologies are discussed in Section 12.2, where a comparative assessment and a summary of sectoral mitigation cost and potentials is provided in coordination with the sectoral Chapters 5 to 11, along with a comparison to aggregate cost and potentials based on IAM outputs presented in Chapter 3.Section 12.3 provides a synthesis of the state and potential contribution of CDR methods for addressing climate change. CDR options associated with the agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU) and energy sectors are dealt with in Chapters 6 and 7 and synthesised in Section 12.3. Other methods, not dealt with elsewhere, are covered in more detail. A comparative assessment is provided for the different CDR options in terms of costs, potentials, governance, impacts and risks, and synergies and trade-offs.Section 12.4 assesses the literature on food systems and GHG emissions. The term ‘food system’ refers to a composite of elements (environment, people, inputs, processes, infrastructures, institutions, etc.) and activities that relate to the production, processing, distribution, preparation and consumption of food, and the outputs of these activities, including socio-economic and environmental outcomes. Climate change mitigation opportunities and related implications for sustainable development and adaptation are assessed, including those arising from food production, landscape impacts, supply chain and distribution, and diet shifts.Section 12.5 provides a cross-sectoral perspective on land occupation and related impacts, risks and opportunities associated with land-based mitigation options as well as mitigation options that are not designated land based, yet occupy land. It builds on SRCCL and Chapter 7 in this report, which covers mitigation in AFOLU, including biomass production for mitigation in other sectors. In addition to an assessment of biophysical and socio-economic risks, impacts and opportunities, this section includes a Cross-Working Group Box (WGII and WGIII) on Mitigation and Adaptation via the Bioeconomy, and a Box on Land Degradation Neutrality as a framework to manage trade-offs in land-based mitigation.Section 12.6 provides a cross-sectoral perspective on mitigation, co-benefits, and trade-offs, including those related to sustainable development and adaptation. The synthesised sectoral mitigation synergies and trade-offs are mapped into options/technologies, policies, international trade, and finance domains. Cross-sectoral mitigation technologies fall into three categories in which the implementation of the technology: (i) occurs in parallel in more than one sector; (ii) could involve interaction between sectors, and/or (iii) could create resource competition among sectors. Policies that have direct sectoral effects include specific policies for reducing GHG emissions and non-climate policies that yield GHG emissions reductions as co-benefits. Policies may also have indirect cross-sectoral effects, including synergies and trade-offs that may, in addition, spill over to other countries.Section 12.7 provides an overview of knowledge gaps, which could be used to inform further research.