The knowledge gaps in the eight sub-regions are quite heterogeneous. In CA, climate-change research is notably insufficient in all sectors included in this report, considering that climatic change, variability and extremes are impacting and will continue to severely impact this sub-region, and the vulnerability of the social and natural systems is high. Data deficiencies must be overcome as renewed research on climate change updates models, scenarios and projected impacts across sectors and levels (i.e., household to country). In NWS, there is a lack of studies on the relationships with increased fire events, and the impacts on the infrastructure of all kinds, on certain lowland, marine and coastal ecosystems and on ecosystem functioning and the provision of environmental services. Experimental studies are rare and most necessary to identify critical ecological thresholds to support decision-making processes, linking glacier retreat to its consequences on biodiversity and ecosystems, combined with different land use trajectories. Complex interactions with processes such as peace agreements in Colombia are yet to be investigated (Salazar et al., 2018). In NSA, there remains a limited amount of peer-reviewed literature addressing the implications of climate change on Indigenous cultures and their livelihoods. In SAM, further data are needed on the vulnerability of traditional populations, impacts on water availability and soil degradation, risks to biodiversity and resilience of ecosystems in connection with climate change.There is a knowledge gap about the likely impact of climate change on NES biodiversity, soil degradation and best adaptation measures. SES is the most urbanised sub-region of CSA, but there are severe knowledge deficits related to the design, implementation and evaluation of adaptation policy plans with respect to climate change. Forecasts related to risk prevention require new studies that address down-scaled climate-change models with concrete solutions to increase cities’ resilience. In SWS, there is a lack of long-term studies addressing climate-change impacts on terrestrial, freshwater and marine ecosystems, which is mainly due to the lack of integrated observational systems. There is a lack of studies projecting future impacts of climate change on the cryosphere, water resources, hazards, risks and disasters on natural and human systems. This is mainly due to the lack of systematic documentation, analysis and evaluation of adaptation strategies adopted, as well as their limitations and the lessons learned from maladaptation processes. There is scant evidence about transformational adaptation to climate change and system resilience. In SSA, there is a need for information related to the cities’ vulnerability to climate change and the impacts of the direct effects of future climate change on cities, energy infrastructure and health. Also, there is a knowledge gap about the financing of climate-change adaptation in SSA.