Technological innovation may bring significant synergy in pursuing SDGs, but it may also create challenges to the economy, human well-being, and the environment (Schillo and Robinson 2017; Thacker et al. 2019; Walsh et al. 2020). The degree of potential synergies and trade-offs among SDGs differs from country to country and over time (Section 16.6.1.1). These potentials will depend on available resources, geographical conditions, development stage and policy measures. Even though synergies and trade-offs related to technological innovation have received the least attention from researchers (Deng et al. 2018), literature show that higher synergy was found where countries’ policies take into account the linkages between sectors (Mainali et al. 2018). For technology innovation to be effective in enhancing synergies and reducing trade-offs, its role and nature in production and consumption patterns, as well as in value chains and in the wider economy, requires clarification. Technology ownership and control together with its current orientation and focus towards productivity, needs to be revised if a meaningful contribution to the implementation of the SDGs is to be achieved in a transformative way (Walsh et al. 2020). Responsible innovation, combining anticipation, reflexivity, inclusion and responsiveness, has been suggested as a framework for conducting innovation (Stilgoe et al. 2013). Also inclusive innovation (Hoffecker 2021) could make sure that unheard voices and interests are included in decision-making, and that methods for this have been implemented in practice (Douthwaite and Hoffecker 2017).There are several examples of how to maximise synergies and avoid or minimise trade-offs when bringing technological innovation to the ground. When implementing off-grid solar energy in Rwanda, synergies were found between 80 of the 169 SDG targets, demonstrating how mainstreaming off-grid policies and prioritising investment in the off-grid sector can realise human development and well-being, build physical and social infrastructures, and achieve sustainable management of environmental resources (Bisaga et al. 2021). Another example is related to wind power in Northeast of Brazil where the creation of direct and indirect jobs has been demonstrated in areas where capabilities are high, as well as associated improvements in wholesale and retail trade and real estate activities, though this also emphasises the need for capacity development along with international collaboration projects (Vasconcellos and Caiado Couto 2021). Other examples include studies raising awareness on solar energy and women’s empowerment (Winther et al. 2018) and recycling and waste ( Cross and Murray 2018).Other actions with the potential to maximise synergies are those related to community or grassroots technological innovation. The importance of the link between technological innovation and community action and its contribution to sustainable development is usually underestimated. Further research is needed on this and, most importantly, its inclusion in the political agenda on sustainable development (Seyfang and Smith 2007). On the other hand, when technological innovation occurs far from where is implemented and participation in the production, and hence training activities of local actors is minimal, co-benefits and synergies among SDGs are limited and usually far below expectations (Bhamidipati and Hansen 2021; Vasconcellos and Caiado Couto 2021). Actions by policymakers that safeguard environmental and social aspects can boost synergies and maximise those co-benefits (Lema et al. 2021). Given that technological change impacts countries, regions and social groups differently, transition policies can be designed to ensure that all regions and communities are able to take advantage of the energy and other transitions (McCauley and Heffron 2018; Henry et al. 2020).Box 16.10 provides insights on how a systemic approach to technological innovation can contribute to reconcile synergies and trade-offs to achieve sustainable development and mitigation goals.