Social equity reinforces capacity and motivation for mitigating climate change (medium confidence). Impartial governance such as fair treatment by law and order institutions, fair treatment by gender, and income equity, increases social trust, thus enabling demand-side climate policies. High status (often high carbon) item consumption may be reduced by taxing absolute wealth without compromising well-being. {5.2, 5.4.2, 5.6}Policies that increase the political access and participation of women, racialised, and marginalised groups increase the democratic impetus for climate action (high confidence). Including more differently situated knowledge and diverse perspectives makes climate mitigation policies more effective. {5.2, 5.6}Carbon pricing is most effective if revenues are redistributed or used impartially (high confidence). A carbon levy earmarked for green infrastructures or saliently returned to taxpayers corresponding to widely accepted notions of fairness increases the political acceptability of carbon pricing. {5.6, Box 5.11}Greater contextualisation and granularity in policy approaches better addresses the challenges of rapid transitions towards zero-carbon systems (high confidence). Larger systems take more time to evolve, grow, and change compared to smaller ones . Creating and scaling up entirely new systems takes longer than replacing existing technologies and practices. Late adopters tend to adopt faster than early pioneers. Obstacles and feasibility barriers are high in the early transition phases. Barriers decrease as a result of technical and social learning processes, network building, scale economies, cultural debates, and institutional adjustments. {5.5, 5.6}The lockdowns implemented in many countries in response to the COVID-19 pandemic demonstrated that behavioural change at a massive scale and in a short time is possible (high confidence). COVID-19 accelerated some specific trends, such as increased uptake of urban cycling. However, the acceptability of collective social change over a longer term towards less resource-intensive lifestyles depends on social mandate building through public participation, discussion and debate over information provided by experts, to produce recommendations that inform policymaking. {Box 5.2}Mitigation policies that integrate and communicate with the values people hold are more successful (high confidence). Values differ between cultures. Measures that support autonomy, energy security and safety, equity and environmental protection, and fairness resonate well in many communities and social groups. Changing  from a commercialised, individualised, entrepreneurial training model to an education cognisant of planetary health and human well-being can accelerate climate change awareness and action. {5.4.1, 5.4.2}Changes in consumption choices that are supported by structural changes and political action enable the uptake of low-carbon choices (high confidence). Policy instruments applied in coordination can help to accelerate change in a consistent desired direction. Targeted technological change, regulation, and public policy can help in steering digitalisation, the sharing economy, and circular economy towards climate change mitigation. {5.3, 5.6}Complementarity in policies helps in the design of an optimal demand-side policy mix (medium confidence). In the case of energy efficiency, for example, this may involve CO2 pricing, standards and norms, and information feedback. {5.3, 5.4, 5.6}