The types of extremes assessed in this chapter include temperature extremes, heavy precipitation and pluvial floods, river floods, droughts, and storms. The drought assessment addresses meteorological droughts, agricultural and ecological droughts, and hydrological droughts (see Glossary). The storms assessment addresses tropical cyclones, extratropical cyclones, and severe convective storms. This chapter also assesses changes in compound events – that is, multivariate or concurrent extreme events – because of their relevance to impacts as well as the emergence of new literature on the subject. Most of the considered extremes were also assessed in SREX and AR5. Compound events were not assessed in depth in past IPCC reports (SREX Chapter 3; Section 11.8 of this Report). Marine-related extremes such as marine heatwaves and extreme sea level, are assessed in Section 9.6.4 and Box 9.2 of this Report.Extremes and related phenomena are of various spatial and temporal scales. Tornadoes have a spatial scale as small as less than 100 metres and a temporal scale as short as a few minutes. In contrast, a drought can last for multiple years, affecting vast regions. The level of complexity of the involved processes differs from one type of extreme to another, affecting our capability to detect, attribute and project changes in weather and climate extremes. Temperature and precipitation extremes studied in the literature are often based on extremes derived from daily values. Studies of events on longer time scales for temperature or precipitation, or on sub-daily extremes, are scarcer, which generally limits the assessment for such events. Nevertheless, extremes on time scales different from daily are assessed for temperature extremes and heavy precipitation, when possible (Sections 11.3 and 11.4). Droughts and tropical cyclones are treated as phenomena in general in the assessment, not limited by their extreme forms, because these phenomena are relevant to impacts (Sections 11.6 and 11.7). Both precipitation and wind extremes associated with storms are considered.Multiple concomitant extremes can lead to stronger impacts than those resulting from the same extremes had they happened in isolation. For this reason, the occurrence of multiple extremes that are multivariate and/or concurrent and/or happening in succession, also called ‘compound events’ (SREX Chapter 3), are assessed in this chapter based on emerging literature on this topic (Section 11.8). Box 11.2 also provides an assessment on low-likelihood, high-impact scenarios associated with extremes.The assessment of projected future changes in extremes is presented as function of different global warming levels (Section 11.2.4 and Cross-Chapter Box 11.1). This provides traceability and comparison to the SR1.5 assessment (Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018, hereafter referred to as SR1.5 Chapter 3). Also, this is useful for decision makers as actionable information, as much of the mitigation policy discussion and adaptation planning can be tied to the level of global warming. For example, regional changes in extremes, and thus their impacts, can be linked to global mitigation efforts. There is also the advantage of separating uncertainty in future projections due to regional responses as a function of global warming levels from other factors such as differences in global climate sensitivity and emissions scenarios (Cross-Chapter Box 11.1). Information is also provided on the translation between information provided at global warming levels and for single emissions scenarios (Cross-Chapter Box 11.1). This facilitates easier comparison with the AR5 assessment and with some analyses provided in other chapters as function of emissions scenarios.A global-scale synthesis of this chapter’s assessments is provided in Section 11.1.7. In particular, Tables 11.1 and 11.2 provide a synthesis for observed and attributed changes, and projected changes in extremes, respectively, at different global warming levels (1.5°C, 2°C, and 4°C). Tables on regional-scale assessments for changes in temperature extremes, heavy precipitation and droughts, are provided in Section 11.9.