The AR6 assessment incorporates the inherently complex nature of climate risk, vulnerability, exposure and impacts, which include feedbacks, cascades, non-linear behaviour and the potential for surprise (Figures 1.3; 1.4). Many different overlapping and complementary terms and methods are used to evaluate and understand complex climate risk relevant to this report, such as aggregated, compounding or cascading risks, all of which are considered here as relevant to complex climate risk (Pescaroli and Alexander, 2018; Simpson et. al. 2021).The dynamic nature of risk and its determinants is one important dimension of complexity. The risk of climate change impacts can be usefully understood as resulting from dynamic interactions among climate-related hazards, the exposure and vulnerability of affected human and ecological systems, and also responses (see Section 1.2.1; AR6 Glossary, IPCC, 2021b; WGI AR6 Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1, Chen et al., 2021; Oppenheimer et al., 2014). The determinants of risk all can vary and change through space and time in response to socioeconomic development and decision making (Figures 1.4; 1.5; Section 16.1). Hazards are affected by current and future changes in climate, including altered climate variability and shifts in frequency and intensity of extreme events (WGI AR6 Chapter 12, Ranasinghe et al., 2021). Such hazards can be sudden, for example, a heat wave or heavy rain event, or slower onset, for example, land loss, degradation and erosion linked to multiple climate hazards compounding. The severity of climate change impacts will depend strongly on vulnerability, which is also dynamic and includes the sensitivity and adaptive capacity of affected human and ecological systems (McDowell et al., 2016; Jurgilevich et al., 2017; Ford et al., 2018; Viner et al., 2020). As a result, risks vary at fine scale across communities and societies and also among people within societies, depending, for example, on intersecting inequalities and context-specific factors such as culture, gender, religion, ability and disability, or ethnicity (Kuruppu, 2009; Jones and Boyd, 2011; Carr and Thompson, 2014; also Section 16.1.4). The dynamic social distribution of impacts is the subject of increasing attention within climate assessment and responses, including the role of adaptation, iterative risk management and climate resilient sustainable development (Section 16.1).Another core area of complexity in climate risk is the behaviour of complex systems, which includes multiple stressors unfolding together, cascading or compounding interactions, and non-linear responses and the potential for surprises (Kopp et al., 2017; Clarke et al., 2018; Yokohata et al., 2019). Risks and responses, including their determinants, can all interact dynamically in shaping the complexity of climate risk (Figure 1.4). The combined effects of multiple stressors or compound hazards and risks are unlikely to be assessed through simple addition of the independent effects and instead require system approaches to understanding risk. While some components may cancel each other out, others may nonlinearly increase risk. Nonlinearities can result from abrupt climate changes, tipping points or thresholds in responses, alternative stable states, low-probability/high-consequence outcomes or events that cannot be predicted based on current understanding (WGI Section 1.4.4.3).Figure 1.4 | Increasingly complex climate-related risks. Risk results from interactions among the determinants of risk—hazard, vulnerability, and exposure, shaped by responses—which can interact in complex ways. Different risks and responses can compound in single a) or multiple b) directions, cascade (e.g., with one event triggering another; c), and aggregate (e.g., with independent determinants of risks co-occurring; d). This complex nature of risk is central in the AR6 assessment. Figure adapted from Simpson et al. (2021).Open figure The nature of climate risk also involves risks from responses themselves (Figure 1.5c). The risks of climate change responses include the possibility of responses not achieving their intended objectives or having trade-offs or adverse side effects for other societal objectives (Annex II: Glossary; Section 16.1). In particular, human responses may create novel hazards and unexpected side effects and entail opportunity costs and path dependencies (Boonstra, 2016). Such feedback loops can unfold at local and global scales, including large-scale interactions among climate, ecological and human systems with human behaviour and decision making affecting such interactions. Response risks can originate from uncertainty in implementation, maladaptation, action effectiveness, technology development or adoption, or transitions in systems (see Sections 1.4 and 1.5). Typical risks may be related to regulation, litigation, competition, sociopolitics or reputation. Interactions across responses can importantly involve co-benefits for other objectives, such as for human health and well-being which may be improved from both reduced air pollution (e.g., AR6 WGI Chapter 6, Szope et al., 2021; WGIII, IPCC, 2022) and enhanced adaptation to climate change. The nature of risk also entails residual impacts that will occur even with ambitious societal responses, given limits to adaptation at sectoral and regional levels (Section 1.4, 16.1, 16.4). In some cases, the losses will be irreversible.Figure 1.5 | Risk in IPCC assessment through time.  (a)  An explicit risk framing emerged in the IPCC Special Report on Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation (SREX) and WGII AR5 (IPCC, 2014a, b).  (b)  In the current assessment, the role of responses in modulating the determinants of risk is a new emphasis (the ‘wings’ of the hazard, vulnerability, and exposure ‘propellers’ represents the ways in which responses modulate each of these risk determinants).  (c)  As the risk assessment spans Working Groups, the differential role of risk determinants for risk related to impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability versus risk related to mitigation becomes an increasingly important feature of climate risk assessment as well as management.Open figure 1.5 (a-b) Open figure 1.5 (c) Due to these complexities, the challenge of assessing risks of climate change is not well bounded, will be framed differently by individuals and groups, involves large and deep uncertainties, and will have unclear solutions and pathways to solutions (Rittel and Webber, 1973; Renn, 2008; see also Sections 1.5.2; 17.2.1). Challenges also include the degree to which time is running out, there is no central authority, those seeking the solutions are also causing the problem, and the present is favoured over the future (Sun and Yang, 2016; see also Section 17.2.1). Both the needs for and the limits to adaptation responses fundamentally depend on progress achieved in reducing GHG emissions and limiting the magnitude of climate change that occurs, interlinked with socioeconomic development trajectories and the many social and political factors shaping climate risks and responses.