Transport mitigation options along the supply chain include improved logistics, the use of alternative fuels and transport modes, and reduced transport distances. Logistics and alternative fuels and transport modes are discussed in Chapter 10. Transport emissions might increase with increasing demand for a diversity of foods as developing countries become more affluent. New technologies that enable food on demand or online food shopping systems might further increase emissions from food transport; however, the consequences are uncertain and might also entail a shift from individual traffic to bulk transport. The impact on food waste is also uncertain as more targeted delivery options could reduce food waste, but easier access to a wider range of food could also foster over-supply and increase food waste. Mitigation opportunities in food transport are inherently linked to decarbonisation of the transport sector (Chapter 10).Retail and the food service industry are the main factors shaping the external food environment or ‘food entry points’; they are the ‘physical spaces where food is obtained; the built environment that allows consumers to access these spaces’ (HLPE 2017). These industries have significant influence on consumers’ choices and can play a role in reducing GHG emissions from food systems. Opportunities are available for optimisation of inventories in response to consumer demands through advanced IT systems (Niles et al. 2018), and for discounting foods close to sell-by dates, which can serve to reduce both food spoilage and wastage (Buisman et al. 2019).As one of the highest contributors to energy demand at this stage in the food value chain, refrigeration has received a strong focus in mitigation. Efficient refrigeration options include advanced refrigeration temperature control systems, and installation of more efficient refrigerators, air curtains and closed display fridges (Chaomuang et al. 2017). Also related to reducing emissions from cooling and refrigeration is the replacement of hydrofluorocarbons which have very high GWPs with lower GWP alternatives (Niles et al. 2018). The use of propane, isobutane, ammonia, hydrofluoroolefins and CO2 (refrigerant R744) are among those that are being explored, with varying success (McLinden et al. 2017). In recent years, due to restrictions on high GWP-refrigerants, a considerable growth in the market availability of appliances and systems with non-fluorinated refrigerants has been seen (Eckert et al. 2021).Energy efficiency alternatives generic to buildings more broadly are also relevant here, including efficient lighting, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems and building management, with ventilation being a particularly high energy user in retail, that warrants attention (Kolokotroni et al. 2015).In developing countries particularly, better infrastructure for transportation and expansion of processing and manufacturing industries can significantly reduce food losses, particularly of highly perishable food (Niles et al. 2018; FAO 2019 a).