The SREX, AR5, and SR1.5 assessed that there is evidence from observations that some extremes have changed since the mid-20th century, that some of the changes are a result of anthropogenic influences, and that some observed changes are projected to continue into the future. Additionally, other changes are projected to emerge from natural climate variability under enhanced global warming (SREX Chapter 3; AR5 Chapter 10).At the global scale, and also at the regional scale to some extent, many of the changes in extremes are a direct consequence of enhanced radiative forcing, and the associated global warming and/or resultant increase in the water-holding capacity of the atmosphere, as well as changes in vertical stability and meridional temperature gradients that affect climate dynamics (see Box 11.1). Widespread observed and projected increases in the intensity and frequency of hot extremes, together with decreases in the intensity and frequency of cold extremes, are consistent with global and regional warming (Section 11.3 and Figure 11.2). Extreme temperatures on land tend to increase more than the global mean temperature (Figure 11.2), due in large part to the land–sea warming contrast, and additionally to regional feedbacks in some regions (Section 11.1.6). Increases in the intensity of temperature extremes scale robustly, and in general linearly, with global warming across different geographical regions in projections up to 2100, with minimal dependence on emissions scenarios (Section 11.2.4, Figure 11.3,and Cross-Chapter Box 11.1; Seneviratne et al., 2016; Wartenburger et al., 2017; Kharin et al., 2018). The frequency of hot temperature extremes (see Figure 11.6), the number of heatwave days and the length of heatwave seasons in various regions also scale well, but nonlinearly (because of threshold effects, Section 11.2.1), with global mean temperatures (Wartenburger et al., 2017; Y. Sun et al., 2018a).Figure 11.2 | Time series of observed temperature anomalies for global average annual mean temperature (black), land average annual mean temperature (green), land average annual hottest daily maximum temperature (TXx, purple), and land average annual coldest daily minimum temperature (TNn, blue). Global and land mean temperature anomalies are relative to their 1850–1900 means and are based on the multi-product mean annual time series assessed in Section 2.3.1.1.3 (see text for references). TXx and TNn anomalies are relative to their respective 1961–1990 means and are based on the HadEX3 dataset (Dunn et al., 2020) using values for grid boxes with at least 90% temporal completeness over 1961–2018. Further details on data sources and processing are available in the chapter data table (Table 11.SM.9). Open figureChanges in annual maximum one-day precipitation (Rx1day) are proportional to mean global surface temperature changes, at about 7% increase per 1°C of warming, that is, following the Clausius–Clapeyron relation (Box 11.1), both in observations (Westra et al., 2013) and in future projections (Kharin et al., 2013) at the global scale. Extreme short-duration precipitation in North America also scales with global surface temperature (Prein et al., 2016b; C. Li et al., 2019a). At the local and regional scales, changes in extremes are also strongly modulated and controlled by regional forcings and feedback mechanisms (Section 11.1.6), whereby some regional forcings, for example, associated with changes in land cover and land use or aerosol emissions, can have non-local or some (non-homogeneous) global-scale effects. In general, there is  high confidence in changes in extremes due to global-scale thermodynamic processes (i.e., global warming, mean moistening of the air) as the processes are well understood, while the confidence in those related to dynamic processes or regional and local forcing, including regional and local thermodynamic processes, is much lower due to multiple factors (see the following subsection and Box 11.1).Figure 11.3 | Regional mean changes in annual hottest daily maximum temperature (TXx) for AR6 land regions and the global land area (except Antarctica), against changes in global mean surface air temperature (GSAT) as simulated by Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6) models under different Shared Socio-economic Pathway (SSP) forcing scenarios, SSP1-1.9, SSP1-2.6, SSP2-4.5, SSP3-7. 0, and SSP5-8.5. Changes in TXx and GSAT are relative to the 1850–1900 baseline, and changes in GSAT are expressed as global warminglevel.  (a) Individual models from the CMIP6 ensemble (grey), the multi-model median under three selected SSPs (colours), and the multi-modelmedian (black); (b) to (l) Multi-model median for the pooled data for individual AR6 regions. Numbers in parentheses indicate the linear scaling between regional TXx and GSAT. The black line indicates the 1:1 reference scaling between TXx and GSAT. See Atlas.1.3.2 for the definition of regions. Changes in TXx are also displayed in the Interactive Atlas. For details on the methods, see Supplementary Material 11.SM.2. Open figureSince AR5, the attribution of extreme weather events, or the investigation of changes in the frequency and/or magnitude of individual and local- and regional-scale extreme weather events due to various drivers (Section 11.2.3 and Cross-Working Group Box 1.1) has provided evidence that greenhouse gases and other external forcings have affected individual extreme weather events. The events that have been studied are geographically uneven. For example, extreme rainfall events in the UK (Schaller et al., 2016; Vautard et al., 2016; Otto et al., 2018b) or heatwaves in Australia (King et al., 2014; Perkins-Kirkpatrick et al., 2016; Lewis et al., 2017b) have spurred more studies than other events. Many highly impactful extreme weather events have not been studied in the event attribution framework. Studies in the developing world are also generally lacking. This is due to various reasons (Section 11.2) including lack of observational data, lack of reliable climate models and other problems (Otto et al., 2020). While the events that have been studied are not representative of all extreme events that occurred, and results from these studies may also be subject to selection bias, the large number of event attribution studies provide evidence that changes in the properties of these local and individual events are in line with expected consequences of human influence on the climate and can be attributed to external drivers (Section 11.9). Figure 11.4 summarizes assessments of observed changes in temperature extremes, in heavy precipitation and in droughts, and their attribution in a map form.Figure 11.4 | Overview of observed changes for cold, hot, and wet extremes and their potential human contribution. Shown are the direction of change and the confidence in: 1) the observed changes in cold and hot as well as wet extremes across the world; and 2) whether human-induced climate change contributed to causing these changes (attribution). In each region changes in extremes are indicated by colour (orange – increase in the type of extreme; blue – decrease; both colours – changes of opposing direction within the region, with the signal depending on the exact event definition; grey – there are no changes observed; and no fill – the data/evidence is too sparse to make an assessment). The squares and dots next to the symbol indicate the level of confidence for observing the trend and the human contribution, respectively. The more black dots/squares, the higher the level of confidence. The information on this figure is based on regional assessment of the literature on observed trends, detection and attribution and event attribution in Section 11.9. Open figure