Adaptation to climate change plays a key role in reducing climate-related risks along with mitigation and sustainable development. From a risk perspective (Section 1.2), emission reductions and carbon removal can both reduce GHG forcing and thus climate-related hazards, while adaptation and sustainable development reduce exposure and vulnerability to those hazards.Important synergies and trade-offs exist among adaptation and mitigation actions (Section 1.5, Chapter 18). Limiting atmospheric concentrations of GHGs reduces the extent of adaptation needed to keep risk within tolerable levels (Section 1.3, Chapter 16). From a global perspective, understanding adaptation and its limits can inform judgements about the best balance among levels of mitigation and adaptation. Such judgements underlie the mitigation goals of the Paris Agreement. From a more local perspective, there is a wide range of mitigation scenarios (Cross-Chapter Box CLIMATE in Chapter 1), including those which meet or miss the Paris Agreement goals, and overshoot scenarios in which global mean temperature exceed targets for several decades before dropping to desired levels. Such scenarios inform assessments of the level of adaptation that may be required (Section 1.4; Chapter 17).Adaptation and sustainable development are also interlinked (Section 18.1). Adaptation facilitates development, which is hindered by impacts and risks from climate change. Development facilitates adaptation by expanding the resources and capacity available to manage climate risks. Viewed from a climate justice perspective, some argue that a more just society is more capable of successful adaptation, while others argue that only adaptation that results in a more just society can be judged successful (Section 1.4.1; Chapter 18).Two concepts—adaptation gaps and limits to adaptation—help frame this report’s assessment of the extent to which current adaptation efforts are adequate to meet societal goals. Adaptation gaps are defined as ‘the difference between actually implemented adaptation and a societally set goal, determined largely by preferences related to tolerated climate change impacts and reflecting resource limitations and competing priorities’ (UNEP et al., 2021). Limits to adaptation describe the extent to which no plausible level of adaptation can meet societal goals (Section 1.4.4). Within the limits, adaptation gaps can be closed by increased and more successful adaptation actions. Beyond the limits, only mitigation can close adaptation gaps.Numerous climate-related impacts already cause severe damage in many places and are projected to increase in the future (Chapter 16). Adaptation can reduce these risks, often significantly, but limits to adaptation have already been reached or are being approached in some sectors and regions (Sections 16.3.1; 16.4). While natural systems worldwide are changing in response to climate change, many are not adapting sufficiently quickly to retain their resilience in the face of current and projected future climate change (Section 16.4). For human systems, numerous lines of evidence suggest that in many regions and sectors current infrastructure, settlement patterns, policies, practices and institutions remain inadequate for current changes in climate conditions (Section 16.2). Inadequate or insufficient adaptation to current conditions is called an adaptation deficit.In response, adaptation efforts have increased significantly since AR5 (Sections 16.3; 17.2; 17.5.2; Cross-Chapter Box ADAPT in Chapter 1). Assessing the adequacy and effectiveness of these efforts as called for in Article 7 of the Paris Agreement remains challenging (Section 1.3.2.2), because much adaptation is not recorded in the literature and because assessment depends on judgements of effectiveness (Section 1.4.1.2), judgements about societal goals including climate justice (Section 1.4.1.1), and expectations about future GHG concentration pathways and other socioeconomic conditions (Section 16.5, Cross-Chapter Box DEEP in Chapter 17).Knowledge about adaptation has significantly expanded since AR5 (Cross-Chapter Box ADAPT in Chapter 1). While understanding regarding the extent of adaptation gaps remains limited, the available evidence suggests significant adaptation gaps exist (high confidence). Many current adaptation efforts constitute adaptation planning, rather than implementation (Section 16.3). Most current implementation efforts represent incremental as opposed to transformational adaptation despite the proximity to adaptation limits (Sections 17.2; 17.5.2). Some current adaptation efforts are considered maladaptive because they increase some climate-related risks even if they reduce others (Sections 1.4.2.4; 17.5; Chapter 16). Gaps exist in key enablers of adaptation, such as finance (Cross-Chapter Box FINANCE in Chapter 17). Given the long time scales involved with many adaptation actions and the potential to significantly reduce longer-term costs with near-term actions, closing many adaptation gaps requires actions over the next few years by governments, business, civil society and individuals at a scale and speed significantly faster than that represented by current trends.