There are multiple actors, other than local governments, that can deliver adaptation action, including businesses, not for profit organisations and trade unions (high confidence) (Giordano  et al., 2020; Eakin  et al., 2021). Empirical evidence since the AR5 highlights the role of communities, universities, the private sector and transnational networks in adaptation (Hunter  et al., 2020; Bäckstrand  et al., 2017). Non-state actors are particularly important in enabling adaptation by linking government agencies with low-income and marginalised communities, including those living in informal settlements (Kuyper, Linnér and Schroeder, 2018; Khosla and Bhardwaj, 2019).Since AR5, civil society and private actors have emerged as core knowledge holders and drivers of experimentation, even succeeding in changing public policy in the process (Klein, Juhola and Landauer, 2017; McKnight and Linnenluecke, 2016; Mees, 2017). Previous IPCC Assessment Reports noted that civil society actors enable local risk awareness, sensitisation and adaptive capacity, and generate locally based innovation (e.g., through community based adaptation programmes).Community based adaptation includes a range of initiatives that put communities at the centre of planning for adaptation, often led by communities themselves (Reid, 2016). Community based adaptation is a comprehensive and effective strategy to deliver resilience at a human scale (Trogal  et al., 2018; Greenwalt  et al., 2020). Many community based responses to climate impacts represent coping strategies developed within households with a small effect on adaptation capacities beyond incremental improvements. Residents adopt private coping strategies to reduce exposure to and the impacts of heat, floods, flash floods, landslides, storms and diseases on their lives (Hambati and Yengoh, 2018). These coping strategies include the construction of physical protection against flooding, reforestation, the construction of terraces, flood diversion measures and interventions to protect houses (such as raised doorsteps or use of sandbags and adoption of building techniques for making homes resilient to storms and landslides), ventilation of houses, urban agriculture and redefinition of daily practices and livelihoods (Navarro  et al., 2020; Malabayabas and Baconguis, 2017; Apreda, 2016; de Andrade and Szlafsztein, 2020; Sahay, 2018; Bausch, Eakin and Lerner, 2018).Individual coping strategies are generally ineffective in reducing extreme risks and they rarely address the underlying structural causes of vulnerability (high confidence) (Sahay, 2018; Rözer  et al., 2016; Jay  et al., 2021). Expending resources on private coping strategies in some cases may divert resources and capacity for wider community adaptation efforts (de Andrade and Szlafsztein, 2020). However, individual coping strategies can provide foundations for the implementation of collaborative action in communities, building on people’s experiences, in ways which may have a longer-term, durable impact on developing resilience (high confidence) (McEwen  et al., 2018). Community based adaptation can be effective at different scales, whether this is to manage transboundary issues (Limthongsakul, Nitivattananon and Arifwidodo, 2017), support the replication of local solutions (Danière  et al., 2016), increase the uptake of adaptation measures (Liang  et al., 2017) or inform the design of more effective policies for resilience (Berquist, Daniere and Drummond, 2015; Odemerho, 2015). Community action may be mediated by NGOs or third sector organisations who play a coordinating or enabling role, particularly where other local government mechanisms are absent.