While scientific knowledge is vital, IK and LK are also necessary for understanding and acting effectively on climate risk (IPCC, 2014a; IPCC, 2019b, SROCC Chapter 1; see also Section 2.4). Indigenous knowledge refers to the understandings, skills and philosophies developed by societies with long histories of interaction with their natural surroundings (IPCC, 2019a). Local knowledge is defined as the understandings and skills developed by individuals and populations, specific to the places where they live (IPCC, 2019a). These definitions relate to the debates on the world’s cultural diversity (UNESCO, 2018a), which are increasingly connected to climate change debates (UNESCO, 2018b). However, there is agreement that, in the same way that there is not a unique definition of Indigenous Peoples because it depends on self-determination (see below), there is not a single definition of neither IK and LK. Therefore, contextualisation is greatly needed. IK and LK will shape perceptions which are vital to managing climate risk in day-to-day activities and longer-term actions.Such experience-based and practical knowledge is obtained over generations through observing and working directly within various environments. Knowledge may be place based and rooted in local cultures, especially when it reflects the beliefs of long-settled communities who have strong ties to their natural environments (Orlove et al., 2010). Other times, knowledge may be embedded in institutions or oral traditions that mobilise them across contexts, for example, as migrant populations bring their knowledge across different regions, and have global relevance. Scientific insights often confirm IK and LK (Ignatowski and Rosales, 2013), but IK and LK also provides specific, alternative ways to understand environmental change. This includes tacit and embodied aspects of knowledge (Mellegård and Boonstra, 2020) that may be crucial to foster local action and that are not easily captured in scientific knowledge (including cultural indicators, scales and interconnectedness between ecosystems). Multiple knowledge systems (i.e. IK, LK, disciplinary knowledge, technical expertise) may coevolve in iterative and interactive processes whereby they influence each other. However, at the same time, they may have specific characteristics so that they cannot be reduced to each other or subsumed by each other, and they all have relevance to understanding the interactions between society and climate (Bremer et al., 2019).Moreover, IK and LK may be particularly relevant to ensuring that climate action does not cause further harm, and also addresses historical injustices committed against Indigenous Peoples and other marginalised social groups, recognising them as active agents of their own change (Nursey-Bray et al., 2019). There are between 370 and 500 million people in at least 90 countries belonging to about 5,000 different ethnic groups that are classified as ‘Indigenous’ (Sangha et al., 2019). Although there is no single, universal definition of Indigenous Peoples, core criterion within both the ILO Convention on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples (1989) and the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UN, 2007) include: (a) self-determination and (b) the recognition that Indigenous Peoples as distinct social and cultural groups that retain collective ancestral ties to the lands they inhabited or to the lands from which they have been displaced. Indigenous Peoples attribute cultural and spiritual values to land, environmental features and landscapes (ILO, 2013; ILO, 2019). Indigenous Peoples suffer disproportionally. For example, they are three times more likely to live in extreme poverty than non-Indigenous Peoples; they are also more likely to suffer discrimination and violence (UN, 2020). At the same time, Indigenous Peoples have long led climate change and environmental protection agendas.Indigenous Peoples have been faced with adaptation challenges for centuries and have developed coping strategies in changing environments (Coates, 2004). Along with other local groups, they hold relevant knowledge about the environment and environmental change, the impact of those changes on ecosystems and livelihoods, and possible effective adaptive responses (see Cross-Chapter Box INDIG in Chapter 18). Therefore, the participation of Indigenous Peoples in climate change decisions and the inclusion of Indigenous knowledge in the IPCC assessment process should be of high priority (following recommendations in UNESCO, 2018b, and UN, 2020). Furthermore, the participation of scientifically trained climate specialists with indigenous backgrounds is valuable to the work of IPCC because the assessment must reflect a diverse range of views and expertise (for examples of IK, see Cross-Chapter Box INDIG in Chapter 18). Article 31 of the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (2007) supports the inclusion of IK and LK in the IPCC assessment process, calling for the use of IK and LK to be protected and validated by Indigenous Peoples themselves and their inclusion as active participants in the assessment (Klenk et al., 2017). Paying special attention to the mechanism whereby some forms of knowledge have been excluded in previous reports—such as the use of technical knowledge or acronyms, or the deployment of discipline-specific validation mechanism—is a first step towards developing an inclusive assessment that reflects a wide range of voices.The AR4 was the first IPCC report to explicitly discuss the value of IK and LK in adaptation and mitigation processes. AR5 recognised the importance of creating synergies across disciplines in the production of knowledge, acknowledging the importance of ‘non-scientific’ sources such as IK, which may not follow discipline conventions but nevertheless reflects the outcomes of learning across generations (Burkett et al., 2014). This also explains the importance of including IK and LK and diverse stakeholder interests and values in local decision making processes (Jones et al., 2014). Such processes should be done in partnership with IK and LK knowledge holders and, when possible, be led by them (Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, 2018). Recent IPCC reports have included distinct sections dedicated to IK and LK (e.g., IPCC, 2019b). The IPCC Special Report on Climate Change and Land (SRCCL) includes a section on ‘Local and Indigenous knowledge for addressing land degradation’ (2019a) and the IPCC Special Report on Ocean and Cryosphere (SROCC) describes LK as ‘what non-Indigenous communities, both rural and urban, use on a daily and lifelong basis,’ a type of knowledge which is recognised as ‘multi-generational, embedded in community practices and cultures, and adaptive to changing conditions’ (2019b). The IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C emphasised the high vulnerability of Indigenous Peoples to climate change. It stated that disadvantaged and vulnerable populations, including Indigenous Peoples and certain local communities, are at disproportionately higher risk of suffering adverse consequences with global warming of 1.5°C and beyond (IPCC, 2018b). The report also assessed evidence in relation to the importance of including IK and LK in adaptation options, explaining their role in early warning systems and arguing that they are part of a range of approaches to catalyse wide-scale values and are consistent with adapting to and limiting global warming to 1.5°C (IPCC, 2018b).Since AR5, several academic publications have directly addressed the challenges of including IK and LK in climate research ( Ford et al., 2016; Yeh, 2016; David-Chavez and Gavin, 2018) and demonstrated its value in building resilience to extreme events related to climate change (Janif et al., 2016; Olazabal et al., 2021). For instance, IK and LK has proved useful in land management methods that reduce wildfire risk (Nepstad et al., 2006; Cook et al., 2012; Welch et al., 2013; Mistry et al., 2016). Since IK is traditionally communicated through storytelling and oral history, there are practical challenges to integrating it into an assessment that prioritises scientific knowledge. There is a need for increased critical engagement towards the co-production of knowledge (Ford et al., 2016). Scholars now recognise the ontological and epistemological differences in approaches, understandings and effects of climate change (Yeh, 2016). One common strategy has been assessing Indigenous observations of climate change alongside scientific data (Klein et al., 2014a) as a means to bridge the gap between scientific inquiry and Indigenous knowledge systems (Fernández-Llamazares et al., 2017). The Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) and the CBD have helped illustrate how to bridge multiple knowledge systems, particularly those conceived from different ontologies. Rather than viewing IK as a single source of knowledge to be compared with scientific data, recent scholarship suggests assessments, such as the IPCC, directly involve Indigenous researchers (Yumagulova et al., 2019) to ensure ethical and equitable engagement with IK. Such partnership with and leadership of Indigenous Peoples on climate research is also consistent with the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (e.g., Bawaka Country et al., 2015; Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, 2018; Cross-Chapter Box INDIG in Chapter 18).