The tables in Section 11.9 provide assessed projected changes in metorological drought, agricultural and ecological drought, and hydrological droughts. The assessment shows that several regions will be affected by more severe agricultural and ecological droughts even if global warming is stabilized at 2°C, including MED, WSAF, SAM and SSA (high confidence), and ESAF, MDG, EAU, SAU, SCA, CAR, NSA, NES, SWS, WCE, NCA, WNA and CNA (medium confidence). Some regions are also projected to be affected by more severe agricultural and ecological droughts at 1.5°C (MED, WSAF, ESAF, SAU, NSA, SAM, SSA, can; medium confidence) At 4°C of global warming, even more regions would be affected by agricultural and ecological droughts (WCE, MED, CAU, EAU, SAU, WCA, EAS, SCA, CAR, NSA, NES, SAM, SWS, SSA, NCA, CNA, ENA, WNA, WSAF, ESAF and MDG). NEAF, SAS are also projected to experience less agricultural and ecological drought with global warming (medium confidence). Projected changes in meteorological droughts are, overall, less extended but also affect several AR6 regions, at 1.5°C and 2°C (MED, EAU, SAU, SCA, NSA, NCA, WSAF, ESAF, MDG) and 4°C of global warming (WCE, MED, EAU, SAU, SEA, SCA, CAR, NWS, NSA, NES, SAM, SWS, SSA, NCA, ENA, WAF, WSAF, ESAF, MDG). Several regions are also projected to be affected by more hydrological droughts at 1.5°C and 2°C (WCE, MED, WNA, WSAF, ESAF) and 4°C of global warming (NEU, WCE, EEU, MED, SAU, WCA, SCA, NSA, SAM, SWS, SSA, WNA, WSAF, ESAF, MDG). To illustrate the changes in both intensity and frequency of drought in the regions where strongest changes are projected, Figure 11.18 displays changes in the intensity and frequency of soil moisture drought under different global warming levels (1.5°C, 2°C, 4°C) relative to the 1851-1900 baseline based on CMIP6 simulations under different SSP forcing scenarios averaged over “drying regions”, i.e. AR6 regions for which there is at least medium confidence in increase in agricultural and ecological drought at 2°C of global warming. The 90% uncertainty ranges for the projected changes in both intensity and frequency are above zero, indicating significant increase in both intensity and frequency of drought in these regions as whole.In summary, more regions are affected by increases in agricultural and ecological droughts with increasing global warming (high confidence). New evidence strengthens the SR1.5 conclusion that even relatively small incremental increases in global warming (+0.5°C) cause a worsening of droughts in some regions (high confidence). Some regions are projected to be affected by more severe agricultural and ecological droughts at 1.5°C of global warming (MED, WSAF, ESAF, SAU, NSA, SAM, SSA, can; medium confidence). A larger number of regions are projected to be affected by more severe agricultural and ecological droughts at 2°C of global warming, including MED, WSAF, SAM and SSA (high confidence), and ESAF, MDG, EAU, SAU, SCA, CAR, NSA, NES, SWS, WCE, NCA, WNA and CNA (medium confidence). At 4°C of global warming, even more regions would be affected by agricultural and ecological droughts (WCE, MED, CAU, EAU, SAU, WCA, EAS, SCA, CAR, NSA, NES, SAM, SWS, SSA, NCA, CNA, ENA, WNA, WSAF, ESAF and MDG). Some regions are also projected to experience less agricultural and ecological drought with global warming (medium confidence;NEAF, SAS). There is  high confidence that the projected increases in agricultural and ecological droughts are strongly affected by AED increases in a warming climate, although ET increases are projected to be smaller than those in AED due to soil moisture limitations and CO2 effects on leaf stomatal conductance. Enhanced atmospheric CO2 concentrations lead to enhanced water-use efficiency in plants (medium confidence), but there is low confidence that it can alleviate agricultural and ecological droughts, or hydrological droughts, at higher global warming levels characterized by limited soil moisture and enhanced AED.Projected changes in meteorological droughts are overall less extended than for agricultural and ecological droughts, but also affect several AR6 regions, even at 1.5°C and 2°C of global warming. Several regions are also projected to be more strongly affected by hydrological droughts with increasing global warming (NEU, WCE, EEU, MED, SAU, WCA, SCA, NSA, SAM, SWS, SSA, WNA, WSAF, ESAF, MDG). Increased soil moisture limitation and associated changes in droughts are projected to lead to increased vegetation stress in many regions, with implications for the global land carbon sink (Cross-Chapter Box 5). There is  high confidence that the global land carbon sink will become less efficient due to soil moisture limitations and associated drought conditions in some regions in higher-emissions scenarios, especially under global warming levels above 4°C; however, there is low confidence on how these water cycle feedbacks will play out in lower-emissions scenarios (at 2°C global warming or lower; Cross-Chapter Box5.1).