In the literature, an event is generally considered extreme if the value of a variable exceeds (or lies below) a threshold. The thresholds have been defined in different ways, leading to differences in the meaning of extremes that may share the same name. For example, two sets of metrics for the frequency of hot/warm days have been used in the literature. One set counts the number of days when maximum daily temperature is above a relative threshold defined as the 90th or higher percentile of maximum daily temperature for the calendar day over a base period. An event based on such a definition can occur at any time of the year, and the impact of such an event would differ depending on the season. The other set counts the number of days in which maximum daily temperature is above an absolute threshold such as 35°C, because exceeding this temperature can sometimes cause health impacts (however, these impacts may depend on location and whether ecosystems and the population are adapted to such temperatures). While both types of hot extreme indices have been used to analyse changes in the frequency of hot/warm events, they represent different events that occur at different times of the year, possibly affected by different types of processes and mechanisms, and possibly also associated with different impacts.Changes in extremes have also been examined from two perspectives: changes in the frequency for a given magnitude of extremes; or changes in the magnitude for a particular return period (frequency). Changes in the probability of extremes (e.g., temperature extremes) depend on the rarity of the extreme event that is assessed, with a larger change in probability associated with a rarer event (e.g., Kharin et al., 2018). However, changes in the magnitude represented by the return levels of the extreme events may not be as sensitive to the rarity of the event. While the answers to the two different questions are related, their relevance may differ for distinct audiences. Conclusions regarding the respective contribution of greenhouse gas forcing to changes in magnitude versus frequency of extremes may also differ (Otto et al., 2012). Correspondingly, the sensitivity of changes in extremes to increasing global warming is also dependent on the definition of the considered extremes. In the case of temperature extremes, changes in magnitude have been shown to often depend linearly on global surface temperature (Seneviratne et al., 2016; Wartenburger et al., 2017), while changes in frequency tend to be nonlinear and can, for example, be exponential for increasing global warming levels (Fischer and Knutti, 2015; Kharin et al., 2018). When similar damage occurs once a fixed threshold is exceeded, it is more important to ask a question regarding changes in the frequency. But when the exceedance of this fixed threshold becomes a normal occurrence in the future, this can lead to a saturation in the change of probability (Harrington and Otto, 2018a). Also, if the impact of an event increases with the intensity of the event, it would be more relevant to examine changes in the magnitude. Finally, adaptation to climate change might change the relevant thresholds over time, although such aspects are still rarely integrated in the assessment of projected changes in extremes. Framing is considered when forming the assessments of this Chapter, including how extremes are defined and how the questions are asked in the literature . 