Wild-harvested foods (e.g., fruits, vegetables and insects) provide dietary diversification and for many people in Africa, wild-harvested food plants may provide a livelihood and/or nutritional safety net when other sources of food fail, such as during drought (Sunderland et al., 2013; Shumsky et al., 2014; Wunder et al., 2014; Baudron et al., 2019b). In Zimbabwe, during lean times, consumption of wild fruits increases, as does their sale to generate income for additional food expenses in poor, rural households (Mithöfer and Waibel, 2004). In Mali, Tanzania and Zambia, household surveys indicate that forest products including wild foods can play an important role in reducing household vulnerability to climate shocks by providing alternative sources of food and income during droughts and floods (Robledo et al., 2012). In the parklands of west Africa, wild trees are a significant source of wild foods and are thus a place where one might expect wild plant foods to make an important contribution to diets and nutrition (Boedecker et al., 2014; Leßmeister et al., 2015). Non-timber forest products are consumed by an estimated 43% of all households in Burkina Faso (FAO, 2019), and wild vegetables accounted for about 50% of total vegetable consumption in southeastern Burkina Faso (Mertz et al., 2001).The focus of projected climate change impacts has been almost exclusively on agricultural production, yet climate change could have substantial impacts on the distribution and availability of wild-harvested food plants in Africa (Wessels et al., 2021). Non-cultivated species in Africa are vulnerable to current and future climate changes, with widespread changes in woody plant cover already observed (see Section 9.6.1.1). Evidence about the impacts of climate change on individual wild food species is less consistent. Communities in the Kalahari (Crate and Nuttall, 2016) and Zimbabwe (Sango and Godwell, 2015) report growing scarcity of wild foods (such as wild meat and fruit) perceived to be, at least in part, due to drought and climate change. Shea tree (Vitellaria paradoxa) nuts provide fats and oils for the diets of many rural populations in west Africa. In Burkina Faso, global warming of 3°C is projected to reduce area of suitable habitat for the shea tree by 14% (Dimobe et al., 2020). In southern Africa, 40% of native, wild-harvested food plant species are projected to decrease in geographic range extent at 1.7°C global warming with range reductions for 66% of species projected for 3.5°C (Wessels et al., 2021).