With increasing warming, adaptation options will become more constrained and less effective. At higher levels of warming, losses and damages will increase, and additional human and natural systems will reach adaptation limits. Integrated, cross-cutting multi-sectoral solutions increase the effectiveness of adaptation. Maladaptation can create lock-ins of vulnerability, exposure and risks but can be avoided by long-term planning and the implementation of adaptation actions that are flexible, multi-sectoral and inclusive.  (high confidence)  The effectiveness of adaptation to reduce climate risk is documented for specific contexts, sectors and regions and will decrease with increasing warming (high confidence)  125. For example, common adaptation responses in agriculture – adopting improved cultivars and agronomic practices, and changes in cropping patterns and crop systems – will become less effective from 2°C to higher levels of warming (high confidence). The effectiveness of most water-related adaptation options to reduce projected risks declines with increasing warming (high confidence). Adaptations for hydropower and thermo-electric power generation are effective in most regions up to 1.5°C to 2°C, with decreasing effectiveness at higher levels of warming (medium confidence). Ecosystem-based Adaptation is vulnerable to climate change impacts, with effectiveness declining with increasing global warming (high confidence). Globally, adaptation options related to agroforestry and forestry have a sharp decline in effectiveness at 3°C, with a substantial increase in residual risk (medium confidence). {WGII SPM C.2, WGII SPM C.2.1, WGII SPM C.2.5, WGII SPM C.2.10, WGII Figure TS.6 Panel (e), 4.7.2}.With increasing global warming, more limits to adaptation will be reached and losses and damages, strongly concentrated among the poorest vulnerable populations, will increase (high confidence). Already below 1.5°C, autonomous and evolutionary adaptation responses by terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems will increasingly face hard limits (high confidence) (Section 2.1.2). Above 1.5°C, some ecosystem-based adaptation measures will lose their effectiveness in providing benefits to people as these ecosystems will reach hard adaptation limits (high confidence). Adaptation to address the risks of heat stress, heat mortality and reduced capacities for outdoor work for humans face soft and hard limits across regions that become significantly more severe at 1.5°C, and are particularly relevant for regions with warm climates (high confidence). Above 1.5°C global warming level, limited freshwater resources pose potential hard limits for small islands and for regions dependent on glacier and snow melt (medium confidence). By 2°C, soft limits are projected for multiple staple crops, particularly in tropical regions (high confidence). By 3°C, soft limits are projected for some water management measures for many regions, with hard limits projected for parts of Europe (medium confidence). {WGII SPM C.3, WGII SPM C.3.3, WGII SPM C.3.4, WGII SPM C.3.5, WGII TS.D.2.2, WGII TS.D.2.3; SR1.5 SPM B.6; SROCC SPM C.1}Integrated, cross-cutting multi- sectoral solutions increase the effectiveness of adaptation. For example, inclusive, integrated and long-term planning at local, municipal, sub-national and national scales, together with effective regulation and monitoring systems and financial and technological resources and capabilities foster urban and rural system transition. There are a range of cross-cutting adaptation options, such as disaster risk management, early warning systems, climate services and risk spreading and sharing that have broad applicability across sectors and provide greater benefits to other adaptation options when combined. Transitioning from incremental to transformational adaptation, and addressing a range of constraints, primarily in the financial, governance, institutional and policy domains, can help overcome soft adaptation limits. However, adaptation does not prevent all losses and damages, even with effective adaptation and before reaching soft and hard limits. (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.2, WGII SPM C.2.6, WGII SPM.C.2.13, WGII SPM C.3.1, WGII SPM.C.3.4, WGII SPM C.3.5, WGII Figure TS.6 Panel (e)  }Maladaptive responses to climate change can create lock-ins of vulnerability, exposure and risks that are difficult and expensive to change and exacerbate existing inequalities. Actions that focus on sectors and risks in isolation and on short-term gains often lead to maladaptation. Adaptation options can become maladaptive due to their environmental impacts that constrain ecosystem services and decrease biodiversity and ecosystem resilience to climate change or by causing adverse outcomes for different groups, exacerbating inequity. Maladaptation can be avoided by flexible, multi-sectoral, inclusive and long-term planning and implementation of adaptation actions with benefits to many sectors and systems. (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.4, WGII SPM.C.4.1, WGII SPM C.4.2, WGII SPM C.4.3}Sea level rise poses a distinctive and severe adaptation challenge as it implies both dealing with slow onset changes and increases in the frequency and magnitude of extreme sea level events (high confidence).  Such adaptation challenges would occur much earlier under high rates of sea level rise (high confidence). Responses to ongoing sea level rise and land subsidence include protection, accommodation, advance and planned relocation (high confidence). These responses are more effective if combined and/or sequenced, planned well ahead, aligned with sociocultural values and underpinned by inclusive community engagement processes (high confidence). Ecosystem-based solutions such as wetlands provide co-benefits for the environment and climate mitigation, and reduce costs for flood defences (medium confidence) , but have site-specific physical limits, at least above 1.5ºC of global warming (high confidence) and lose effectiveness at high rates of sea level rise beyond 0.5 to 1 cm yr -1 (medium confidence). Seawalls can be maladaptive as they effectively reduce impacts in the short term but can also result in lock-ins and increase exposure to climate risks in the long term unless they are integrated into a long-term adaptive plan (high confidence). {WGI SPM C.2.5; WGII SPM C.2.8, WGII SPM C.4.1; WGII 13.10, WGII Cross-Chapter Box SLR; SROCC SPM B. 9, SROCC SPM C.3.2, SROCC Figure SPM.4, SROCC Figure SPM.5c}. (Figure 3.4)Figure 3.4: Observed and projected global mean sea level change and itsimpacts, and time scales of coastalriskmanagement. Panel (a):Global mean sea level change in metres relative to 1900. The historical changes (black) are observed by tide gauges before 1992 and altimeters afterwards. The future changes to 2100 and for 2150 (coloured lines and shading) are assessed consistently with observational constraints based on emulation of CMIP, ice-sheet, and glacier models, and median values and.likely ranges are shown for the considered scenarios. Relative to 1995-2014, the likely global mean sea level rise by 2050 is between 0.15 to 0.23 m in the very low GHG emissions scenario (SSP1-1.9) and 0.20 to 0.29 m in the very high GHG emissions scenario (SSP5-8.5); by 2100 between 0.28 to 0.55 m under SSP1-1.9 and 0.63 to 1.01 m under SSP5-8.5; and by 2150 between 0.37 to 0.86 m under SSP1-1.9 and 0.98 to 1.88 m under SSP5-8.5 (medium confidence). Changes relative to 1900 are calculated by adding 0.158 m (observed global mean sea level rise from 1900 to 1995-2014) to simulated changes relative to 1995-2014. The future changes to 2300 (bars) are based on literature assessment, representing the 17th–83rd percentile range for SSP1-2.6 (0.3 to 3.1 m) and SSP5-8.5 (1.7 to 6.8 m). Red dashed lines: Low-likelihood, high-impact storyline, including ice sheet instability processes. These indicate the potential impact of deeply uncertain processes, and show the 83rd percentile of SSP5-8.5 projections that include low-likelihood, high-impact processes that cannot be ruled out; because of low confidence in projections of these processes, this is not part of a likely range. IPCC AR6 global and regional sea level projections are hosted at https://sealevel.nasa.gov/ipcc-ar6-sea-level-projection-tool. The low-lying coastal zone is currently home to around 896 million people (nearly 11% of the 2020 global population), projected to reach more than one billion by 2050 across all five SSPs. Panel (b): Typical time scales for the planning, implementation (dashed bars) and operational lifetime of current coastal risk-management measures (blue bars). Higher rates of sea level rise demand earlier and stronger responses and reduce the lifetime of measures (inset). As the scale and pace of sea level rise accelerates beyond 2050, long-term adjustments may in some locations be beyond the limits of current adaptation options and for some small islands and low-lying coasts could be an existential risk. {WGI SPM B.5, WGI C.2.5, WGI Figure SPM.8, WGI 9.6; WGII SPM B.4.5, WGII B.5.2, WGII C.2.8, WGII D.3.3, WGII TS.D.7, WGII Cross-Chapter Box SLR} (Cross-Section Box.2)Open figure 