Indigenous Peoples throughout North America have experienced five centuries of territorial expropriation, loss of access to natural resources and, in many cases, barriers to the use of their sacred sites (Gabbert, 2004; Louis, 2007). The history of Indigenous struggles to preserve distinct cultural knowledge and assert autonomy in the face of colonialism has shaped land-use patterns and relationships with traditional territories (Cross-Chapter Box INDIG in Chapter 18; Alfred and Corntassel, 2005; Tuhiwai Smith, 2021). Climate change is now creating additional challenges for Indigenous Peoples. For example, increased water scarcity due to higher temperatures and diminished precipitation have led to reduced crop yields for Maya farmers in Yucatan (Sioui, 2019). Thawing permafrost in subarctic Canada (Quinton et al., 2019) has interfered with the land-based livelihoods of the Indigenous Dene Peoples (CCP6).Recent climate-related changes represent cultural threats similar to the ones that occurred when European settlement began in the Americas over 500 years ago (Whyte, 2016; Whyte, 2017). Thus, for Indigenous Peoples, who often disproportionately bear the impacts of climate change, such changes are not novel, but seen as déjà vu (Whyte, 2016). Since livelihoods and subsistence are often directly dependent on the land and water, Indigenous Peoples have direct insights into the localised impacts of global environmental change. Indeed, Indigenous Peoples consider themselves stewards of the land (and water), and have a spiritual duty to care for the land and its flora, fauna and aquatic community, or ‘Circle’ of beings. Indigenous knowledge (IK) has gained recognition for its potential to bolster Western scientific research about climate change. Many recent examples demonstrate the scientific value of IK for resource management in climate-change adaptation and mitigation (e.g., Kronik and Verner, 2010; Maldonado et al., 2013; Wildcat, 2013; Etchart, 2017; Nursey-Bray et al., 2019). For example, Indigenous practices have not only contributed to the present understanding of North American forest fires, but also that the practice of frequent small-scale anthropogenic fires, also called cultural burns, is a key method to prevent large-scale destructive fires (Section 14.7.1). The growing interest and recognised value in these practices, particularly in California, has led to formal agreements with state and federal agencies (Long et al., 2020a; Lake, 2021).Indigenous relationships with the land are commonly informed and guided by a cultural ethic of ‘responsibility-based thinking’ (Sioui and McLeman, 2014). The Indigenous cultural ethic informs and mediates personal and collective conduct with a sense of duty or responsibility towards human and other-than-human relations (see Sioui, 2020). The Indigenous responsibility-based outlook stems from a cultural paradigm that understands that it is human beings who must learn to live  with the land (Cajete, 1999; Pierotti and Wildcat, 2000; McGregor et al., 2010a; McGregor, 2014). This way of thinking instils in its adherents an inherent awareness that the other-than-human realm is capable of existing and thriving without humans. Thus, it is for our own sake (as humans) that we learn to live according to certain ever-shifting parameters, requiring us to remain acutely attuned to our physical surroundings. This Indigenous cultural precept is perhaps among the most significant contributions of Indigenous Peoples to the rest of humanity in the face of climate change.Indigenous relationships with natural systems continue to be mediated by cultural orders of governance and legal systems that pre-date, by several millennia, European traditions in North America. Napolean (2012) describes Indigenous legal orders as dynamic and encompassing knowledge that is simultaneously legal, religious, philosophical, social and scientific. Customary Indigenous legal orders (e.g., Borrows, 2002; Napolean, 2012) stand in contrast to Eurocentric understandings of law, which are closely related to, and founded on, the Western principles of rights. Indigenous legal orders are based on duties, obligations and responsibilities to the land and all beings, including humans, animals, plants, future generations and the departed/ancestors (Borrows, 2002; Borrows, 2010a; Borrows, 2010b; Borrows, 2016). Indigenous spiritual laws are centred on the values of responsibility and accountability to the land, and how these differ, in theory and in practice, from Western law, which is based on ‘universal’ principles, with little consideration for the local environmental context (Craft, 2014). Research has elucidated these Indigenous understandings about how their land-based responsibilities act as the foundation of how humans must operate according to the land on which they live and depend.With increasing climate-change threats to land-based subsistence and cultural practices, Indigenous Peoples are increasingly taking their rightful leadership roles in resource co-management arrangements and other stewardship activities (Section 14.5.2.2). Indeed, Indigenous Peoples are increasingly assuming leadership positions with regard to land governance and climate-change action, as the stewards of their traditional territories since time immemorial. Therefore, it is imperative for Indigenous scholars, Elders and knowledge holders to occupy leadership roles in climate-change adaptation and mitigation, especially when their territories are concerned (Section 14.7; CCP6). For instance, Indigenous ‘resurgence’ paradigms draw on the strengths of traditional land-based culture and knowledge with regard to Indigenous leadership in land governance and stewardship (Alfred and Corntassel, 2005; Alfred, 2009; Simpson, 2011; Corntassel and Bryce, 2012; Coulthard, 2014; Alfred, 2015). Indigenous leadership in climate-change policy, therefore, can ensure that Indigenous right to self-determination is respected and upheld to allow Indigenous Peoples to continue to carry out their cultural responsibilities to the land, for the benefit of all North Americans (Powless, 2012; Etchart, 2017).In northern Canada, a fusion of leading-edge Western science and IK on permafrost informed the co-development of predictive decision-support tools and risk management strategies to inventory and manage permafrost and adapt to permafrost thaw (CCP6). Permafrost thaw in the Dehcho region of Canada is widespread and occurring at unprecedented rates (WGI). The Dehcho Collaborative on Permafrost  (DCoP) aims to improve the understanding of and ability to predict and adapt to permafrost thaw 3. 1 DCoP’s collaborative approach, which places Indigenous Peoples in leadership positions, generates the new knowledge, predictive capacity and decision-support tools to manage natural resources that support Indigenous Dene Peoples’ ways of life. Indigenous–academic partnerships can enhance climate-change adaptation and mitigation capacity, and provide openings for more holistic co-management approaches that recognise and affirm the central role of Indigenous Peoples as stewards of their ancestral territories, especially as they face accelerating climate-change impacts. Academic researchers and their Indigenous partners can support climate-change resilience via mobilising IK in stewardship and adaptation; researching governance arrangements, economic relationships and other factors that hinder Indigenous efforts in these areas; proposing evidence-based policy solutions at international and national scales; and outlining culturally relevant tools for assessing vulnerability and building capacity will also support climate-change resilience. Such IK underpins successful climate-change adaptation and mitigation (very high confidence) (see Green and Raygorodetsky, 2010; Kronik and Verner, 2010; Alexander et al., 2011; Powless, 2012; Ford et al., 2016; Nakashima et al., 2018). The inclusion of IK in adaptation and mitigation not only supports Indigenous cultural survival but also enables governments to recognise the territorial sovereignty of Indigenous Peoples.Responsibility-based philosophies of Indigenous Peoples from across the continent support the development of climate-change adaptation and mitigation strategies that promote responsible and respectful relationships with the environment over the long term. Adapting to change, in all its forms, has since time immemorial been one of the defining characteristics of Indigenous cultures on Turtle Island (the American continent). In Yucatan, one Elder explained that with regards to climate-change impacts in the region, the Maya have always dealt with k’ech,  or change, and that accepting and responding to change is part of the Maya identity and responsibility (Sioui, 2020). Given successive failures in adequately and effectively responding to climate change, it has become urgent for the rest of the human collective to (re)learn from Indigenous cultures to (re)consider our responsibility/ies to the land—the world over—and to reorient our societal imperatives to better respond and react to change. Such a process of learning from IK could foster the development of climate-change policies that promote responsible and respectful relationships with the environment over the long term, and prove to be more effective and holistic. Although most inhabitants of North America are non-Indigenous, it is possible and beneficial for our societies to learn to think and act in a more responsibility-based way about our relations to the land, and, by extension, about climate-change policy. A collective commitment to protecting and advancing Indigenous territorial rights, so Indigenous Peoples can continue to reassert their spiritual duty and role as stewards of their traditional territories, benefits all human and other-than-human ‘Peoples’.1 3 See http://scottycreek.com/DCoP 