Assessing the links between human health, well-being and climate change is a new task for AR6, reflecting a broad perspective on health that increasingly acknowledges the importance of well-being and its interactions with individual and population health. The World Health Organization (WHO) defines health as ‘a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity’ (WHO, 1946). Although this chapter assesses physical health, mental health and general well-being separately, they are inter-connected; any type of health problem can reduce overall well-being and vice versa. For example, a child receiving inadequate nutrition may not be sick but is experiencing a clear threat to well-being that has implications for future physical and mental health.There is no consensus definition of well-being, but it is generally agreed that it includes a predominance of positive emotions and moods (e.g., happiness) compared with extreme negative emotions (e.g., anxiety), satisfaction with life, a sense of meaning and positive functioning, including the capacity for unimpaired cognitive functioning and economic productivity (Diener and Tay, 2015; Piekałkiewicz, 2017). A capabilities approach (Sen, 2001) focuses on the opportunity for people to achieve their goals in life (Vik and Carlquist, 2018) or the ability to take part in society in a meaningful way, and is reflected in personal freedoms, human agency, self-efficacy, ability to self-actualise, dignity and relatedness to others (Markussen et al., 2018). An indigenous perspective on well-being is broad and typically incorporates a healthy relationship with the natural world (Sangha et al., 2018); emotional and mental health have also been linked to a strong cultural identity (Butler et al., 2019; Dockery, 2020). ‘Health’ itself is sometimes described as including relationships between humans and nature as well as links to community and culture (Donatuto et al., 2020; Dudgeon et al., 2017).Subjective well-being is consistently associated with personal indicators such as higher income, greater economic productivity, better physical health (Diener and Tay, 2015; Delhey and Dragolov, 2016; De Neve et al., 2013) and environmental health, and it is reflected in societal indicators such as social cohesion and equality (Delhey and Dragolov, 2016). In a global survey of over 1 million people taken between 2004 and 2008 via the Gallup World Poll, annual income and access to food were strong predictors of subjective well-being and a healthy environment. In particular, access to clean water was important even when household income was controlled (Diener and Tay, 2015). Access to green spaces was also closely associated with well-being (high confidence) (Lovell et al., 2018; Yuan et al., 2018).