Many components of the energy system are affected by individual weather events and climate conditions (Table 6.10). In addition, a range of compounding effects can be anticipated, as the complex, interconnected climate and energy systems are influenced by multiple weather and climate conditions. This raises the question of whether the energy system transformation needed to limit warming will be impacted by climate change.The impacts of climate change on the energy system can be divided into three areas: impacts on the energy supply; impacts on energy consumption; and impacts on energy infrastructure. The rest of this section focuses on how the futurechanges in climate drivers might affect the ability of the energy system transformation needed to mitigate climate change. The discussion of energy infrastructure in this section is limited to electricity system vulnerability.Table 6.10 | Relevance of the key climatic impact drivers (and their respective changes in intensity, frequency, duration, timing, and spatial extent) for major categories of activities in the energy sector. The climate impact drivers (CIDs) are identified in Table 12.1 in Chapter 12 of WGI AR6 report. The relevance is assessed as: positive/negative (+ or –), or both (±). D&O: Design and Operation; CF: Capacity Factor.Relevance of the climate impact driver: Figure 6.22: Characteristics of global net-zero energy systems when global energy and industrial CO2 emissions reach net-zero.  Scenarios reaching net-zero emissions show differences in residual emissions and carbon removal  (a)  , energy resources  (b)  , electrification  (c)  , energy intensity (as measured here by energy GDP–1) (d)  , and emissions trajectory  (e)  , particularly with respect to warming levels (light blue = scenarios that limit warming to 1.5°C (>50%) with no or limited overshoot and scenarios that return warming to 1.5°C (>50%) after a high overshoot; yellow = scenarios that limit warming to 2°C (>67%) and scenarios that limit warming to 2°C (>50%); dark blue = scenarios that limit warming to 2.5°C (>50%), scenarios that limit warming to 3°C (>50%), scenarios that limit warming to 4°C (>50%), and scenarios that exceed warming of 4°C (≥50%); grey = unspecified warming). Points represent individual scenarios from the AR6 Scenarios Database, with probability density distributions shown along each axis for each warming level (colours corresponding to warming levels) and for all scenarios (black).