Mitigation measures have the potential to reduce the progress of negative impacts on ecosystems, although it is unlikely  that all impacts can be mitigated ( high confidence) (Ohashi et al. 2019). The specifics of mitigation achievement are crucial, since large-scale deployment of some climate mitigation and land-based CDR measures could have deleterious impacts on biodiversity (Santangeli et al. 2016; Hof et al. 2018).Climate change mitigation actions to reduce or slow negative impacts on ecosystems are likely  to support the achievement of SDGs 2, 3, 6, 12, 14 and 15. Some studies show that stringent and constant GHG mitigation practices bring a net benefit to global biodiversity even if land-based mitigation measures are also adopted (Ohashi et al. 2019), as opposed to delayed action which would require much more widespread use of BECCS. Scenarios based on demand reductions of energy and land-based production are expected to avoid many such consequences, due to their minimised reliance on BECCS (Conijn et al. 2018; Grubler et al. 2018; Bowles et al. 2019; Soergel et al. 2021a). Stringent mitigation that includes reductions in demand for animal-based foods and food waste could also relieve pressures on land use and biodiversity ( high confidence), both directly by reducing agricultural land requirements (Leclère et al. 2020) and indirectly by reducing the need for land-based CDR (van Vuuren et al. 2018).As environmental conservation and sustainable use of the Earth’s terrestrial species and ecosystems are strongly related, recent studies have evaluated interconnections among key aspects of land and show a pathway to the global sustainable future of land (Popp et al. 2014; Erb et al. 2016; Obersteiner et al. 2016; Humpenöder et al. 2018). Most studies agree that many biophysical options exist to achieve global climate mitigation and sustainable land use in future. Conserving local biodiversity requires careful policy design in conjunction with land-use regulations and societal transformation in order to minimise the conversion of natural habitats.