Spatial planning, urban form, and infrastructure can be utilised to deliberately increase both locational and mobility options for socio-behavioural change in support of urban mitigation. The mitigation impacts of active travel can include a reduction of mobility-related lifecycle CO2 emissions by about 0.5 tonnes over a year when an average person cycles one trip per day more, and drives one trip per day less, for 200 days a year (Brand et al. 2021). Urban areas that develop and implement effective 15/20-minute city programmes are very likely to reduce urban energy use and multiply emission reductions, representing an important cascading effect.Accessibility as a criterion widens the focus beyond work trips and VKT/VMT, paying attention to a broader set of destinations beyond workplaces, as well as walking and biking trips or active travel. It holds promise for targeting and obtaining greater reductions in GHG emissions in household travel by providing access through walking, biking, and public transit. Accessibility as a criterion for urban form has been embedded in neighbourhood form models since at least the last century and in more recent decades in the ‘urban village’ concept of the New Urbanism (Duany and Plater-Zyberck 1991) and TODs (Calthorpe 1993). However, accessibility did not gain much traction in urban planning and transportation until the last decade. The experience of cities and metropolitan areas with the COVID-19 pandemic has led to a further resurgence in interest and importance (Handy 2020; Hu et al. 2020), and it is becoming a criterion at the core of the concept of the 15/20-minute city (Moreno et al. 2021; Pozoukidou and Chatziyiannaki 2021). Initially, neighbourhoods have been designed to provide quality, reliable services within 15 or 20 minutes of active transport (i.e., walking or cycling), as well as a variety of housing options and open space (Portland Bureau of Planning and Sustainability 2012; Pozoukidou and Chatziyiannaki 2021; State Government of Victoria 2021). Community life circles strategy for urban areas has also emphasised walking access and health (Weng et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2021). The growing popularity of the 15/20-minute city movement has significant potential for reducing VMT/VKT and associated GHG emissions.