The SER framework was introduced in the late 1990s by a French NGO (Negawatt 2017) advocating for a decarbonised energy transition. In 2015, the SER framework was considered in the design of the French energy transition law, and the French energy transition agency (ADEME) is developing its 2050 scenario based on the SER framework.The three pillars of the SER framework include (i) sufficiency, which tackles the causes of the environmental impacts of human activities by avoiding the demand for energy and materials over the lifecycle of buildings and goods, (ii) efficiency, which tackles the symptoms of the environmental impacts of human activities by improving energy and material intensities, and (iii) the renewables pillar, which tackles the consequences of the environmental impacts of human activities by reducing the carbon intensity of energy supply (Box 9.1, Figure 1). The SER framework introduces a hierarchical layering, sufficiency first followed by efficiency and renewable, which reduces the cost of constructing and using buildings without reducing the level of comfort of the occupant.Box 9.1, Figure 1 | SER framework applied to the building sector.  Source: Saheb (2021).Open figure Applying sufficiency principles to buildings requires (i) optimising the use of buildings, (ii) repurposing unused existing ones, (iii) prioritising multi-family homes over single-family buildings, and (iv) adjusting the size of buildings to the evolving needs of households by downsizing dwellings (Wilson and Boehland 2005; Duffy 2009; Fuller and Crawford 2011; Stephan et al. 2013; Huebner and Shipworth 2017; Sandberg 2018; McKinlay et al. 2019; Ellsworth-Krebs 2020; Berrill et al. 2021) (Box 9.1, Figure 2).Sufficiency is not a new concept, its root goes back to the Greek word sôphrosunè, which was translated in Latin to sobrietas, in a sense of enough (Cézard and Mourad 2019). The sufficiency concept was introduced to the sustainability policy debate by (Sachs 1993) and to academia by (Princen 2003). Since 1997, Thailand considers sufficiency, which was framed already in 1974 as Sufficiency Economy Philosophy, as a new paradigm for development with the aim of improving human well-being for all by shifting development pathways towards sustainability (Mongsawad 2012). The Thai approach is based on three principles (i) moderation, (ii) reasonableness, and (iii) self-immunity. Sufficiency goes beyond the dominant framing of energy demand under efficiency and behaviour. Sufficiency is defined as avoiding the demand for materials, energy, land, water and other natural resources while delivering a decent living standard for all within the planetary boundaries (Saheb 2021 b, Princen 2005). Decent living standards are a set of essential material preconditions for human well-being which includes shelter, nutrition, basic amenities, health care, transportation, information, education, and public space (Rao and Baer 2012; Rao and Min 2018; Rao et al. 2019). Sufficiency addresses the issue of a fair consumption of space and resources. The remaining carbon budget, and its normative target for distributional equity, is the upper limit of sufficiency, while requirements for a decent living standard define the minimum level of sufficiency. Sufficiency differs from efficiency in that the latter is about the continuous short-term marginal technological improvements which allow doing morewith less in relative terms without considering the planetary boundaries, while the former is about long-term actions driven by non-technological solutions (i.e., land-use management and planning), which consume less in absolute-term and are determined by the biophysical processes (Princen 2003).Box 9.1, Figure 2 | Sufficiency interventions and policies in the building sector.  Source: Saheb (2021).Open figureDownsizing dwellings through cohousing strategies by repurposing existing buildings and clustering apartments when buildings are renovated and by prioritising multi-family buildings over single-family homes in new developments (Wilson and Boehland 2005; Duffy 2009; Fuller and Crawford 2011; Stephan et al. 2013; Huebner and Shipworth 2017; Sandberg 2018; McKinlay et al. 2019; Ellsworth-Krebs 2020; Ivanova and Büchs 2020; Berrill and Hertwich 2021) are among the sufficiency measures that avoid the demand for materials in the construction phase and energy demand for heating, cooling and lighting in the use phase, especially if the conditioned volume and window areas are reduced (Duffy 2009; Heinonen and Junnila 2014). Less space also means less appliances and equipment and changing preferences towards smaller ones (Aro 2020). Cohousing strategies provide users, in both new and existing buildings, a shared space (i.e., for laundry, offices, guest rooms and dining rooms) to complement their private space. Thus, reducing per capita consumption of resources including energy, water and electricity (Klocker et al. 2012; N. Klocker 2017), while offering social benefits such as limiting loneliness of elderly people and single parents (Wankiewicz 2015; Riedy et al. 2019). Senior cooperative housing communities and eco-villages are considered among the cohousing examples to scale-up (Kuhnhenn et al. 2020). Local authorities have an important role to play in the metamorphosis of housing by proposing communal spaces to be shared (Williams 2008; Marckmann et al. 2012) through urban planning and land-use policies (Duffy 2009; Newton et al. 2017). Thus, encouraging inter-generational cohousing as well as interactions between people with different social backgrounds (Williams 2008; Lietaert 2010). Progressive tax policies based on a cap in the per-capita floor area are also needed to adapt the size of dwellings to households’ needs (Murphy 2015; Akenji 2021).Efficiency, and especially energy efficiency and more recently resource efficiency, and the integration of renewable to buildings are widespread concepts since the oil crisis of the seventies, while only most advanced building energy codes consider sufficiency measures (IEA 2013). Efficiency and renewable technologies and interventions are described in Sections 9.4 and 9.9.A systematic categorisation of policy interventions in the building sector through the SER framework (Box 9.1, Figure 1) enables identification of the policy areas and instruments to consider for the decarbonisation of the building stock, their overlaps as well as their complementarities. It also shows that sufficiency policies go beyond energy and climate policies to include land-use and urban planning policies as well as consumer policies suggesting a need for a different governance including local authorities and a bottom-up approach driven by citizen engagement.Compared to AR5, this assessment introduces four novelties (i) the scope of CO2 emissions has been extended from direct and indirect emissions considered in AR5 to include embodied emissions, (ii) beyond technological efficiency measures to mitigate GHG emissions in buildings, the contribution of non-technological, in particular of sufficiency measures to climate mitigation is also considered, (iii) compared to the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C (SR1.5), the link to sustainable development, well-being and decent living standard for all has been further developed and strengthened, and finally (iv) the active role of buildings in the energy system by making passive consumers prosumers is also assessed.COVID-19 emphasised the importance of buildings for human well-being, however, the lockdown measures implemented to avoid the spread of the virus has also stressed the inequalities in the access for all to suitable and healthy buildings, which provide natural daylight and clean air to their occupants (see also Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1). COVID-19 and the new health recommendations (World Health Organization 2021) emphasised the importance of ventilation and the importance of indoor air quality (Sundell et al. 2011; Nazaroff 2013; Fisk 2015; Guyot et al. 2018; Wei et al. 2020). The health crisis has also put an emphasis on preventive maintenance of centralised mechanical heating, ventilation, and cooling systems. Moreover, the lockdown measures have led to spreading the South Korean concept of officetel (office-hotel) (Gohaud and Baek 2017) to many countries and to extending it to officetelschool. Therefore, the projected growth, prior to the COVID-19, of 58% of the global residential floor area by 2050 compared to the 290 billion m² yr –1 in 2019 might well be insufficient. However, addressing the new needs for more residential buildings may not, necessarily mean constructing new buildings. In fact, repurposing existing non-residential buildings, no longer in use due to the expected spread of teleworking triggered by the health crisis and enabled by digitalisation, could be the way to overcome the new needs for officetelschool triggered by the health crisis.The four novelties introduced in this assessment link the building sector to other sectors and call for more sectoral coupling when designing mitigation solutions. Guidelines and methodologies developed in Chapters 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 are adopted in this chapter. Detailed analysis in building GHG emissions is discussed based on Chapter 2 and scenarios to assess future emissions and mitigation potentials were selected based on Chapters, 3 and 4. There are tight linkages between this chapter and Chapter 6, 7, 8, 10 and 11, which are sectoral sectors. This chapter focusses more on individual buildings and building clusters, while Chapter 8 discusses macro topics in urban areas. Findings of this chapter provides contribution to cross-sectoral prospection (Chapter 12), policies (Chapter 13), international cooperation (Chapter 14), investment and finance (Chapter 15), innovation (Chapter 16), and sustainable development (Chapter 17).