Building services make buildings more comfortable, functional, efficient, and safe. In a generic point of view, building services include shelter, nutrition, sanitation, thermal, visual, and acoustic comfort, entertainment, communications, elevators, and illumination. In a more holistic view building services are classified as shown in Figure 9.2.Figure 9.2 | Classification of building services. The coloured small squares to the left of each building service denote to which other classifications that building service may relate to a lesser extent. Source: adapted from Vérez and Cabeza (2021).Open figure A building management system is a system of devices configured to control, monitor, and manage equipment in or around a building or building area and is meant to optimise building operations and reduce cost (Schuster et al. 2019). Recent developments include the integration of the system with the renewable energy systems (Arnone et al. 2016), most improved and effective user interface (Rabe et al. 2018), control systems based on artificial intelligence and internet of things (IoT) (Farzaneh et al. 2021).The use of air conditioning systems in buildings will increase with the experienced rise in temperature (Davis and Gertler 2015; De Falco et al. 2016) (Figure 9.8). This can ultimately lead to high energy consumption rates. Therefore, adoption of energy efficient air conditioning is pertinent to balance the provision of comfortable indoor conditions and energy consumption. Some of the new developments that have been done include ice refrigeration (Xu et al. 2017), the use of solar photovoltaic power in the air conditioning process (Burnett et al. 2014), and use of common thermal storage technologies (De Falco et al. 2016) all of which are geared towards minimising energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions.Building designs have to consider provision of adequate ventilation. Natural ventilation reduces energy consumption in buildings in warm climates compared to air conditioning systems (Taleb 2015; Azmi et al. 2017). Enhanced ventilation has higher benefits to the public health than the economic costs involved (MacNaughton et al. 2015).On the refrigeration systems, the recent developments include the use of solar thermoelectric cooling technologies as an energy efficient measure (Liu et al. 2015b); use of nanoparticles for energy saving (Azmi et al. 2017) to mention some.Lambertz et al. (2019) stated that when evaluating the environmental impact of buildings, building services are only considered in a very simplified way. Moreover, it also highlights that the increasing use of new technologies such as Building Information Modelling (BIM) allows for a much more efficient and easier calculation process for building services, thus enabling the use of more robust and complete models. Furthermore, recent studies on building services related to climate change (Vérez and Cabeza 2021) highlight the importance of embodied energy (Parkin et al. 2019) (Section 9.4).