AR5 Chapter 7 (Porter et al., 2014) reported with high confidence that food production systems were being negatively impacted by climate change, including both terrestrial and aquatic food species (Porter et al., 2014). Increased temperatures will have large negative impacts on the food production system under 2°C warming by late 20th century, with temperatures exceeding 4°C posing even greater risk to global food security (Porter et al., 2014). Adaptation options are needed to reduce the risk from climate change, but there was limited information of their effectiveness.The 1.5°C Special Report concluded that climate-related risks to food security will rise under 1.5°C and will increase further under 2°C or higher. Above 1.5°C, currently available adaptation options will be much less effective and site-specific limits to adaptation will be reached for vulnerable regions and sectors. There was high confidence that limiting warming to 1.5°C will result in smaller net reductions in yields of major crops affecting food availability and nutrition, and that rising temperatures will adversely affect livestock via changes in feed quality, fertility, production, spread of diseases and water availability.The IPCC Special Report on Climate Change and Land (SRCCL) expanded beyond the 1.5°C report to provide more in-depth information on climate change interactions with food security, desertification and degradation. There was high confidence that climate risks, both for slow changes and extreme events, are interlinked with ecosystem services, health and food security, often cascading and potentially reinforcing effects. Climate change already affects all dimensions of food security, namely availability, access, utilisation and stability, by disrupting food production, quality, storage, transport and retail. These effects exacerbate competition for land and water resources, leading to increased deforestation, biodiversity reduction and loss of wetlands. With high certainty, limiting global warming would lower future risks related to land, such as water scarcity, fire, vegetation shifts, degradation, desertification and food insecurity and malnutrition, particularly for those most vulnerable today: small-scale food producers in low-income countries, Indigenous communities, women, and the urban poor. SRCCL assessed a range of adaptation pathways to increase food resilience.The IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (SROCC) identified climate change impacts of warming, deoxygenation and acidification of the ocean and reductions in snow, sea ice and glaciers as having major negative impacts on fisheries and crops watered from mountain runoff and agriculture. These impacts affect food provisioning of food and directly threaten livelihoods and food security of vulnerable coastal communities and glacier-fed river basins. Climate change impacts on fisheries will be particularly high in tropical regions, where reductions in catch are expected to be among the largest globally, leading to negative economic and social effects for fishing communities and with implications for the supply of fish and shellfish (high confidence). While specific impacts will depend on the level of global warming and mitigative action to improve fisheries and aquaculture management, some current management practices and extraction levels may not be viable in the future.