Efforts to address climate change take place alongside and in the context of other major environmental problems, such as biodiversity loss. IPBES, established in 2012, builds on the IPCC model of a science–policy interface and assessment. The Platform’s objective is to ‘strengthen the science–policy interface for biodiversity and ecosystem services for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, long-term human well-being and sustainable development’ (UNEP, 2012). The SROCC (IPCC, 2019b) and SRCCL (IPCC, 2019a) assessed the relations between changes in biodiversity and in the climate system. The rolling work programme of IPBES up to 2030 will address interlinkages among biodiversity, water, food and health. This assessment will use a nexus approach to examine interlinkages between biodiversity and the above-mentioned issues, including climate change mitigation and adaptation. Furthermore, IPBES and IPCC will directly collaborate on biodiversity and climate change under the rolling work programme.Addressing climate change alongside other environmental problems, while simultaneously supporting sustainable socio-economic development, requires a holistic approach. Since AR5, there is increasing attention on the need for coordination among previously independent international agendas, and a recognition that climate change, disaster risk, economic development, biodiversity conservation and human well-being are tightly interconnected. The current COVID-19 pandemic provides an example of the need for such interconnection, with its widespread impacts on economy, society and environment (e.g., Shan et al., 2021). Cross-Chapter Box 6.1 assesses the consequences of the COVID-19 lockdowns for emissions of GHGs and SLCFs, and related implications for the climate. Another example of the interconnected nature of these issues is the close link between SLCF emissions, climate change and air quality concerns (Chapter 6). Emissions of halocarbons have previously been successfully regulated under the Montreal Protocol and its Kigali Amendment. This has been achieved in an effort to reduce ozone depletion that has also modulated other anthropogenic climate influence (Estrada et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2013). In the process, emissions of some SLCFs were jointly regulated to reduce environmental and health impacts from air pollution (e.g., Gothenburg Protocol; Reis et al., 2012). Considering the recognized importance of SLCFs in climate change processes, the IPCC decided in May 2019 to approve that the IPCC Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories produces an IPCC Methodology Report on SLCFs to develop guidance for national SLCF inventories.The evolving governance context since AR5 challenges the IPCC to provide policymakers and other actors with information relevant for both adaptation to and mitigation of climate change, and for the loss and damage induced.