The COVID-19 pandemic recovery effort includes significant opportunities for African countries to reduce future vulnerability to compound climate, economic and health risks. Fiscal recovery packages could set economies on a pathway towards net-zero emissions, reducing future climate risk or entrench fossil-fuel intensive systems, exacerbating risk (Hepburn et al., 2020; Dibley et al., 2021; IEA, 2021). Investments in renewable energy, building efficiency retrofits, education and training, natural capital (i.e., ecosystem restoration and EbA), R&D, connectivity infrastructure and sustainable agriculture can help meet both economic recovery and climate goals (Hepburn et al., 2020; Dibley et al., 2021).The impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic have been substantially worsened by climate hazards in many places. In others, outbreak response has been disrupted (Phillips et al., 2020; Kruczkiewicz et al., 2021). These vulnerabilities are rooted in insufficient disaster preparedness infrastructure but are almost always worsened by social and economic inequality. Ensuring the most vulnerable populations are properly protected from climate change has co-benefits for recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic (Manzanedo and Manning, 2020). In particular, efforts to reduce syndemic vulnerabilities across key sectors (especially health, livelihoods and food security) will lessen climate change impacts and will also reduce the risk and impacts of future epidemics and pandemics, for example, during the pandemic, water scarcity has been a barrier to a key risk mitigation behaviour (hand washing). In the long-term, development efforts focused on WASH will reduce this vulnerability and also reduce the health toll of diarrheal disease linked to climate change (Anim and Ofori-Asenso, 2020; Zvobgo and Do, 2020). Spending recovery funds on social safety nets will reduce inequality and protect the most vulnerable communities (especially women and low-income and marginalised communities) from the social and economic impacts of disasters. Key among these safety nets is universal health coverage, including low- or no-cost access to essential medicine, high-quality preventative care, financial protections against medical debt and increased geographic and population coverage for all services (Hallegatte et al., 2016). All of these are key components of climate change adaptation for health and will reduce both the rate at which future outbreaks start and their total scope and impact (Carlson et al., 2021). The co-benefits of multilateral cooperation on the attainment of universal health coverage will be a key determinant of success or failure in both climate change adaptation and pandemic preparedness.