The private sector comprises a diverse set of actors who influence, interact with and support adaptation efforts, generally through shared governance with the public sector. The weight of evidence points to the benefits of these collaborations and the importance of voluntary code-making and self-regulation (Section 17.4.2.1.6). In North America, NGOs and professional organisations have been important agents of change in the adaptation field (Bennett and Grannis, 2017; Stults and Meerow, 2017). Efforts have included supporting community-based resilience, network building, Internet-based guidance and resources, case studies, workshops and other services to support adaptation action (e.g., vulnerability assessments, scenario-based planning).Market and financial mechanisms have provided important buffering capacity against climate shocks in North America. Insurance products are being developed to meet emerging climate risks, especially related to availability and pricing of flood insurance in Canada (Thistlethwaite, 2017; Davies, 2020) and the USA (Kousky et al., 2021). Some existing US flood insurance products provided through joint public and private arrangements has led to rebuilding in flood-prone locations (Zellmer and Klein, 2016). The price of these products may limit their uptake in low-income neighbourhoods (Cannon et al., 2020).Professional organisations have participated in the development and adoption of measures to integrate climate resilience into the built environment. This includes new designs, guidelines, codes, standards and specifications, in addition to infrastructure inventories that incorporate evaluation of vulnerabilities and identification of priority at-risk areas (Amec Foster Wheeler and Credit Valley Conservation, 2017; ASCE, 2018a). These efforts are supported by provincial/state and federal initiatives (e.g., Canada’s Climate Lens (Infrastructure Canada, 2018), and California’s Climate-Safe Infrastructure Working Group (Climate-Safe Infrastructure Working Group, 2018)). Infrastructure Canada has undertaken Canada-wide initiatives to improve infrastructure resilience to climate change 14. 10 The Standards Council of Canada (SCC) established the Northern Infrastructure Standardization Initiative 1511  engaging stakeholders, including Indigenous Peoples, to develop standards specific for addressing climate-change impacts on northern infrastructure design, planning and management, and community development (Standards Council of Canada, 2020).Professional organisations in the USA (e.g., National Medical Association, American Institute of Architects, Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies, Water Utility Climate Alliance, American Society of Adaptation Professionals) have engaged with their members particularly through training about urban adaptation (Stults and Meerow, 2017). The private sector and citizens (Klein et al., 2018) have been involved in the management of increasing flood risk, such as the adoption of property-level flood protection (Thistlethwaite and Henstra, 2018; Valois et al., 2019), implementing FireSmart Canada and Firewise USA guidance (see Box 14.2). In Canada, Engineers Canada developed the PIEVC Protocol to provide guidance for professionals in engineering and geoscience 16. 12 Research-based institutions have accelerated the development of Internet-based tools for visualising and exploring climate information, in addition to furthering the scholarship on adaptation. In the USA, joint university, foundation and government programmes have contributed to advancing the field with products such as oceanographic and fishery climate forecasting tools (Section 14.5.2), in addition to methods for evaluating water resource plans under uncertainty about future mean and extreme conditions (ASCE, 2018a; Ray et al., 2020). Some regional research centres focus on stakeholder engagement in addition to research; these include the National and Regional Climate Adaptation Science Center Network of the US Geological Survey 17, 13  the US Department of Agriculture’s Climate Hub Network 1814  and the Climate Program Office of NOAA1915  which includes the Regional Integrated Science Assessment Network 2016  to support delivery of climate services. So-called networks of networks, consisting of NGOs as well as state and city government programmes, have provided an alternative to federal support. For example, the Science for Adaptation Network was formed subsequent to dismantling the federal advisory group to the US National Climate Assessment (Moss et al., 2019).