Emergent constraints are based on relationships between observable aspects of the current or past climate (such as trends or variability), and uncertain aspects of future climate change (such as the strength of particular feedbacks). These relationships are evident across an ensemble of models. When combined with an observational estimate of the trend or variability in the real climate, such emergent relationships can yield ‘emergent constraints’ on future climate change (Hall et al., 2019). At the time of AR5 (WGI, Section 9.8.3), there had been relatively few applications of the technique to constrain carbon cycle sensitivities, but there have been many studies published since (e.g., the summary in Cox, 2019). Figure 5.28 shows some key published emergent constraints on the carbon cycle in ESMs.Figure 5.28 | Examples of emergent constraints on the carbon cycle in Earth system models (ESMs), reproduced from previously published studies:  (a) projected global mean atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration by 2060 under the RCP8. 5 emissions scenario against the simulated CO2 in 2010 (Friedlingstein et al., 2014b; Hoffman et al., 2014);  (b) sensitivity of tropical land carbon to warming (γ LT) against the sensitivity of the atmospheric CO2 growth-rate to tropical temperature variability (Cox et al., 2013; Wenzel et al., 2014);  (c) sensitivity of extratropical (30°N–90°N) gross primary production to a doubling of atmospheric CO2 against the sensitivity of the amplitude of the CO2 seasonal cycle at Kumkahi, Hawaii to global atmospheric CO2 concentration (Wenzel et al., 2016);  (d) change in high-latitude (30°N–90°N) gross primary production versus trend in high-latitude leaf area index or ‘greenness’ (Winkler et al., 2019);  (e) sensitivity of the primary production of the Tropical Ocean to climate change versus its sensitivity to El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO)-driven temperature variability (Kwiatkowski et al., 2017);  (f) global ocean carbon sink in the 2090s versus the current-day carbon sink in the Southern Ocean. In each case, a red dot represents a single ESM projection, the grey bar represents the emergent relationship between the y-variable and the x-variable, the blue bar represents the observational estimate of the x-axis variable, and the green bar represents the resulting emergent constraint on the y-axis variable. The thicknesses represent ± one standard error in each case. Figure after Cox (2019). Further details on data sources and processing are available in the chapter data table (Table 5.SM.6). Open figure