This chapter is part of a cluster devoted to regional climate (Chapters 10, 11, 12 and Atlas). It introduces many of the aspects relevant to the generation of regional climate information that are dealt with in detail elsewhere. Figure 10.4 summarizes how these chapters relate to one another and to the rest of the report.Figure 10.4 | Schematic diagram that illustrates the treatment of regional climate change in the different parts of the WGI Report and how the chapters relate to each other. Open figure(Chapter 11 assesses observed, attributed and projected changes in weather and climate extremes, provides a mechanistic understanding on how changes in extremes are related to human-induced climate change and provides regional, continental and global-scale assessments on changes in extremes, including compound events. Chapter 12 identifies elements of the climate system relevant for sectoral impacts referred to as climatic impact-drivers (CIDs), assesses past and future evolutions of sector-relevant CIDs for each AR6 region, synthesizes such evolutions for different time periods and by GWL, and assesses how CIDs are used in climate services. The (Atlas assesses observed, attributed and projected changes in mean climate, performs a comparison of CMIP5, CMIP6 and CORDEX simulations, evaluates downscaling performance and assesses approaches to communicate climate information. The Interactive Atlas facilitates the exploration of datasets assessed in all chapters through a wide range of maps, graphs and tables generated in an interactive manner. This allows for the comparison of changes at warming levels and scenario/time-period combinations, display of indices for extremes and CIDs, and serves all chapters in the report to facilitate synthesis information and support the Technical Summary and the Summary for Policymakers.Other chapters also include a strong regional component and provide context for the assessment of regional climate. Chapter 1 introduces the different types of climatic regions used in the AR6 WGI Report and the main types of climatic models. Chapter 2 describes the recent and current state of the climate from observations, most of which are key for the production of regional information. Chapter 3 assesses human influence on the climate system and Chapter 4 assesses climate change projections, with a global focus. These three chapters include phenomena that are important for shaping regional climate such as general circulation, jets, storm tracks, blocking and modes of variability. At the same time, the visualization of information in global maps in these chapters provides valuable information for the sub-continental scale. Chapter 5 assesses the knowledge about the carbon and biogoechemical cycles, whose fluxes and responses show variability that is strongly regional in nature. Chapter 6 assesses the regional evolution of short-lived climate forcers as well as their influence on regional climate and air quality. Chapter 8 assesses observed and projected changes in the variability of the regional water cycle, including monsoons, while changes of the regional oceans, changes in cryosphere and regional sea level change are assessed in Chapter 9.