Material efficiency, an important mitigation option (SDG 13, climate action) for heavy industries, is yet to be fully acknowledged and leveraged (Gonzalez Hernandez et al. 2018a; Sudmant et al. 2018; Dawkins et al. 2019). Material efficiency directly addresses SDG 12 (responsible production and consumption) but also provides opportunities to reduce the pressures and impacts on environmental systems (SDG 6, clean water and sanitation) (Olivetti and Cullen 2018). Exploiting material efficiency usually requires new business models and provides potential co-benefits of increased employment and economic opportunities (SDG 8, decent work and economic growth).Material efficiency also provides co-benefits through infrastructural development (SDG 9, industry, innovation and infrastructure) (Mathews et al. 2018) to support the wide range of potential material efficiency strategies including light-weighting, reusing, remanufacturing, recycling, diverting scrap, extending product lives, using products more intensely, improving process yields, and substituting materials (Allwood et al. 2011). Worrell et al. (2016) also emphasises how material efficiency improvements, in addition to limiting the impacts of climate change help deliver sustainable production and consumption co-benefits through environmental stewardship. Binder and Blankenberg (2017) and Dhandra (2019) show that sustainable consumption is positively related to life satisfaction and subjective well-being (SDG 3), and Guillen-Royo (2019) adds positive associations with happiness and life satisfaction.The reduction in excessive consumption and demand for products and services generates a reduction in post-consumption waste and so enhances clear water and sanitation (SDG 6) (Govindan 2018; Minelgaitė and Liobikienė 2019), and reduces waste along product supply chains and lifecycles (SDG 12) (Genovese et al. 2017; UNSD 2020). At the risk side there are possible reductions of employment, incomes, sales taxes from the material extraction and processing activities, considered as excessive for sustainable consumption (Thomas 2003).