The UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), as well the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Paris Climate Agreement, the UN Sendai Framework Disaster Risk Reduction and the UN Habitat New Urban Agenda, helped push climate risk management and adaptation forward from the global to the national level, from the planning stage into implementation, and provide benchmarks for adaptation progress. To assess adaptation progress (Section 17.5), the interplay between top-down (institutional) and bottom-up (individual/social/community) processes, multi-scale interaction (local, regional, national and international), iterative risk management, differing forms of knowledge, and equity are especially crucial (particularly Sections 17.2, 17.4). Parallel to these advances is an understanding and assessment of appropriate decision support tools, methods and evaluation metrics (Section 17.3).Since AR5, significant advances have been made in regard to the understanding of the drivers of decision-making and contexts in which climate risk decision-making takes place. Climate risk decision-making generally, and adaptation specifically, has been a focus within the IPCC special reports in the sixth assessment cycle. An overall goal of climate risk management is to eliminate or reduce the risk to levels that are socio-politically and economically acceptable. Risk management to an acceptable level may not be feasible because of limits or barriers to adaptation. Future potential risks are a more complex matter given the need to define time scales and spatial extent, and uncertainties. In the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C (SR1.5) (IPCC, 2018a), the risks associated with climate-related impacts were found to be higher under emission scenarios above 1.5°C, raising awareness for the need to limit the impacts of warming through the acceleration of climate mitigation and both incremental and transformational adaptation (IPCC, 2018a).The AR6 IPCC Special Report on Climate Change and Land (SRCCL) (IPCC, 2019b) added the dimensions of pace, intensity and scale of climate impacts and adaptation or mitigation responses and adverse consequences. Relevant land-based adverse consequences include those on lives, livelihoods, health and well-being, economic, social and cultural assets and investments, infrastructure, services (including ecosystem services), ecosystems and species.While a generic understanding of the decision-making process has emerged from the literature, the chapter assesses how these components and their dimensions interact across a range of temporal (short, long term as defined in the IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate [SROCC]), scalar (household to global), institutional/governance (formal, informal, bottom-up, top-down) and magnitude (micro adaptation, small scale; macro adaptation, large scale) (Section 17.2). The IPCC SRCCL placed emphasis on acknowledging co-benefits and trade-offs to avoid barriers to implementation, with particular attention to land use decisions. It states that this coordination can be supported by building networks of decision makers across scales and sectors, including local stakeholders from vulnerable groups, and by adopting and implementing policies in a flexible and iterative manner (IPCC, 2019b).