Contributing Authors:  Suraje Dessai (United Kingdom/Portugal), Jana Sillmann (Norway/Germany), Carlo Buontempo (United Kingdom/Italy), Cecilia Conde (Mexico), Aida Diongue-Niang (Senegal), Francisco J. Doblas-Reyes (Spain), Christopher Jack (South Africa), Richard Jones (United Kingdom), Benjamin Lamptey (Niger/Ghana), Xianfu Lu (United Kingdom/China), Douglas Maraun (Austria/Germany), Ben Orlove (United States of America), Roshanka Ranasinghe (Netherlands/Sri Lanka/Australia), Alex C. Ruane (United States of America), Anna Steynor (South Africa), Bart van den Hurk (Netherlands), Robert Vautard (France)Climate services involve the provision of climate information in such a way as to assist decision-making. The service needs to have appropriate engagement from users and providers; be based on scientifically credible information and expertise; have an effective access mechanism; and meet the users’ needs (Hewitt et al., 2012). Predominantly, climate services are targeted at informing and enabling risk management in adaptation to climate variability and change (Jones et al., 2014; Vaughan et al., 2018). Chapter 1 introduces climate services in a broader context of interaction between science and society, including how climate information can be tailored and co-produced for greatest utility in specific contexts. Chapter 10 assesses the key foundations for the generation of climate information about regional climate change. Chapters 11, 12 and Atlas comprehensively assess regional climate change information. The Interactive Atlas gives access to various repositories of quantitative climate information. In WGII, Chapter 17 assesses climate services in the context of climate risk management.Cross-Chapter Box 12.2Climate service contexts are diverse and complex. They can be characterized using different factors such as sectors, regions, purposes, time horizons, data sources, level of processing of climate data, background knowledge, type of climate service providers, as well as the nature of the interactions between providers, users and other stakeholders (Bessembinder et al., 2019). To illustrate the wide diversity of climate change information in climate services, a useful categorization is by user –provider engagement of climate services (Cross-Chapter Box 12.2, Figure 1). One broad category includes ‘websites and web tools’ which generally focuses on data and information provision (Hewitson et al., 2017). Websites are generally able to reach many users, but engagement is passive through one-way transfer of information. The second broad category involves ‘interactive group activities’, such as workshops, meetings and interactive forums, which create a stronger dialogue between climate service providers and decision makers. Multi-way communication and regular interaction enable building of trust, co-learning and co-production of products and services. The third broad category involves ‘focused relationships’ which are tailored, targeted and address very specific needs of the user. Effective engagement arises from an iterative process between the provider and user to ensure the user’s needs are being addressed appropriately (Hewitt et al., 2017a).The diversity of climate services practices and products is illustrated here using three case studies each representing one of the broad categories of user –provider engagement (Cross-Chapter Box 12.2, Figure 1). Cross-Chapter Box 12.2, Figure 1 | Schematic of three broad categories of engagement between users and providers of climate services. Figure adapted from Hewitt et al. (2017a) . Open figureCase study 1: Websites and web toolsThe Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) provides free and open access to climate data, tools and information through a website. It also includes demonstration projects that show how C3S data can be used in practice through case studies, training sessions and workshops (Thepaut et al., 2018). A large audience of the service is composed of intermediate users, loosely defined as the community of operators in one of the intermediate steps between the primary producers of climate data and the ultimate beneficiaries.To address this audience, the strategy of C3S is to provide free and open access climate data and tools such as historical observations (both satellite and ground-based), climate data records relevant for a number of Essential Climate Variables (Bojinski et al., 2014), global and regional reanalyses, climate monitoring bulletins, seasonal predictions, as well as both global (a selection of simulations from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project, CMIP; Taylor et al., 2012; Eyring et al., 2016) and regional climate projections from the Coordinated Regional Downscaling Experiment (Euro- and Med-CORDEX; Jacob et al., 2014; Ruti et al., 2016). A number of indices for various sectors can be calculated through cloud-based tools. For instance, in order to address the specific needs of key sectoral users, climate impact indicators for common variables such as ‘heating degree days’ can be calculated by the users and made available to others (Buontempo et al., 2020). All this material is quality controlled following a standardized, transparent and traceable framework.C3S also facilitates the tailoring process, by providing a series of working open-source, cloud-based demonstrators which show how climate data can be transformed into actionable information to meet specific user requirements. This tailoring process covers the chain between the definition of key indicators all the way to the user interface. The definition and production of C3S products involve scientists that produced and assessed the data. A variety of potential users are involved in the definition of indicators and other products.Through its quality assurance process and demonstrators, C3S provides a basic evaluation of all climate data; it provides access, and it encourages the users to develop their own case-specific analysis within the C3S infrastructure. Trustworthiness and relevance of such an analysis are substantially strengthened through a distillation process, co-designed by the user and data provider, and drawing upon multiple lines of evidence and process-based evaluation of model fitness (Section 10.5).Case study 2: Interactive group activitiesScience-application engagement is extremely challenging, especially in critically important but complex contexts such as rapidly growing cities in developing nations (Culwick and Patel, 2017). The publicly funded Future Resilience for African CiTies And Lands (FRACTAL) project was conceived and designed in response to extensive and strong evidence and experience that useful and useable climate services require strong mutual relationships across the science-application interface that can be built using supportive processes and structures (A. Taylor et al., 2017).Informed by this understanding, FRACTAL was grounded in a very reflexive and context-guided approach with city decision-making at its core (A. Taylor et al., 2017). Representatives from selected southern African cities were included in the proposal design and, throughout the project, a core principle was to allow the city partners to lead and guide the process.Two important elements were deployed in FRACTAL: ‘embedded researchers’ and ‘learning labs’. Embedded researchers were seconded into the municipality and served as the essential connection for the learning process within each city (Steynor et al., 2020). Learning labs (Arrighi et al., 2016) were interactive structures in which participants from academia, local city government and councils, state-owned enterprises, communities and community development institutions, and others could interact. Embedded researchers and learning labs were the backbone of ongoing learning processes within each city and resulted in more focused small-group dialogues, capacity development and training processes, and within-city research and engagement activities. Each learning lab focused initially on identifying ‘burning issues’ without a requirement that they involve strong climate linkages. However, with the overarching focus on resilience, discussions evolved in that direction and the burning issues identified often centred around water in peri-urban areas, for example in Windhoek, Namibia (Scott et al., 2018).The learning labs also introduced and developed the concept of Climate Risk Narratives (CRNs) as a process and product to generate and integrate climate and socio-economic information relevant to adaptation and resilience (see Cross-Chapter Box 12.2, Figure 2, and Box 10.2 on storylines) (Jack et al., 2020). The first CRNs were informed primarily by climate evidence, but also included some tentative socio-economic impact elements gleaned from literature and other studies. Their content was intentionally provocative and designed to promote debate and discussion, and subsequent iteration. Many participants noted that this was the first time that various important conversations across governance structures and disciplinary areas had occurred around what climate change may actually mean. This demonstrates the engagement value of CRNs as a key element in an iterative co-production process to ensure important details are included correctly, such as the local context, terms and names as well as providing reality checks on the impacts and societal responses (Jack et al., 2020).Cross-Chapter Box 12.2This case study emphasizes the positive contributions of the fit, tailoring and contextualization of climate information with respect to the specific decision-making needs of particular users (Section 10.5; AR6 WGII Section 17.4.4.2.2), the importance of participatory planning for risk management in urban areas (AR6 WGII Sections 6.3.3.3 and 6.4.2) and the importance of networks and organizations which link researchers, policymakers and end-users to promote adaptation in African cities (AR6 WGII Box 9.4). Upscaling this type of interactive activity to cater for the large number of user demands remains a challenge. Cross-Chapter Box 12.2, Figure 2 | Climate Risk Narrative infographic developed through the FRACTAL Windhoek Learning Lab process. Figure adapted from Jack et al. (2020).Open figureCase study 3: Focused relationshipsThis broad category involves one-to-one engagement between a provider and a user with very specific needs. One such user is the Asian Development Bank (ADB), which has committed to making all its investments climate resilient by implementing a climate risk management framework (ADB, 2014, 2018; Lu, 2019). The climate risk management framework mandates all climate-sensitive investment projects undertake a climate risk and adaptation assessment, to identify material risks of a changing climate to the proposed project and potential adaptive measures to be incorporated into project design, implementation, maintenance and/or monitoring. Typically, loan project processing teams procure consulting services for a bespoke climate risk and adaptation assessment (CRA) for a specific project. The user –provider engagement is highly targeted and goal-oriented. An example of such a focused user –provider engagement is the CRA carried out as part of an investment project in Vietnam, the Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought-Affected Provinces (WEIDAP) project.In the wake of the El Niño-induced 2015–2016 severe drought, which caused major damage to agricultural land in the Central Highlands of Vietnam, the WEIDAP project was initiated to improve water productivity of irrigated agriculture. Proposed project interventions include a package of both ‘soft’ (e.g., policy, institutional and capacity building, on-farm water efficiency practices) and ‘hard’ (modernized irrigation schemes) activities. To ensure that the project delivers expected benefits under a changing climate, consultants were recruited to carry out a detailed CRA, working as part of the overall project processing team. Through extensive consultations with the rest of the project team and review of literature including relevant climate projections, the CRA consultants chose to construct three broad climate scenarios for the 2050s (a time frame appropriate for the lifetime of the irrigation schemes being proposed under the project): a warm-and-wet, a hot-and-wet, and a hotter future. Outputs from a selection of CMIP5 models were analysed under these three scenarios, to derive changes in temperature, rainfall and potential evapotranspiration, which in turn were used as inputs to hydrological, crop and agro-economics models to assess the impacts of climate change on the overall project performance. Table 1 presents the summary of the key parameters under the three scenarios. Recommendations from the CRA included (largely minor) refinements and additional activities for drought planning, detailed engineering design of the relevant project components (such as access roads, river crossings and foundations), and support for poorer farmers who may not be able to afford access to water and climate-resilient technologies.This case study illustrates that climate information distillation including a sustained iterative engagement between climate information users, producers and translators can improve the quality of the information and the decision-making (Section 10.5; WGII Section 17.4.4.2.2). Cross-Chapter Box 12.2, Table 1 | Summary of annual province-level changes in temperature, precipitation and evapotranspiration under the three broad scenarios in southern Vietnam.   Scenario 1: warm-and-wet; Scenario 2: hot-and-wet; Scenario 3: hotter. Source: Table 3 in ADB (2020).ItemProvince and Scenario NumberBình ThuânÐă´k Lă´kÐă´k NôngKhánh HòaNinh Thuân123123123123123ΔT (°C) 1.11.82.61.11.52.01.22.12.71.11.82.61.11.52.6ΔP (%) 28–124817–88–873–1072715ΔPET (%) 368457479368358ΔT = change in temperature; ΔP = change in precipitation; ΔPET = change in potential evapotranspiration.Note: Colour scale indicates significance of changes for the water balance.