When compared to the routine assessment of simulated SST, simulated SSS has not received the same research attention at global- to basin-scales. For CMIP3, there was reasonable agreement between the basin-scale patterns of salinity, with a comparatively fresher Pacific when contrasted to the salty Atlantic, and basin salinity maxima features aligning well with the corresponding atmospheric evaporation minus precipitation field (Durack et al., 2012). Similar features are also reproduced in CMIP5 along with realistic variability in the upper layers, but less variability than observations at 300 m and deeper, especially in the poorly sampled Antarctic region (Pierce et al., 2012). In a regional study, only considering the Indian Ocean, CMIP5 SSS was assessed and it was shown that model biases were primarily linked to biases in the precipitation field, with ocean circulation biases playing a secondary role (Fathrio et al., 2017a). The sea surface salinity bias in CMIP6 models is shown in Figure 3.23b.For the first time in AR5, alongside global zonal mean temperature, global zonal mean salinity bias with depth was assessed for the CMIP5 models. This showed a strong upper ocean (<300 m) negative salinity (fresh) bias of order 0.3 PSS-78, with a tendency toward a positive salinity (salty) bias (<0.25 PSS-78) in the Northern Hemisphere intermediate layers (200–3000 m) (Flato et al., 2013). These biases are also present in CMIP6, albeit with slightly smaller magnitudes (Figure 3.25). Here we expand the global zonal mean bias assessment to consider the three independent ocean basins individually, which allows for an assessment as to which basin biases are dominating the global zonal mean. The basin with the most pronounced biases is the Atlantic, with a strong upper ocean (<300 m) fresh bias, of order 0.3 PSS-78 just like the global zonal mean, and a marked subsurface salinity bias that exceeds 0.5 PSS-78 in equatorial waters between 400–1000 m.The Pacific Ocean shares the strongest similarity to the global bias, with a similar upper ocean (<300 m) fresh bias. Lower magnitude positive salinity biases (about 0.3 PSS-78) are also present in both hemispheres between 200 and 3000 m, and deeper in the Southern Hemisphere (Figure 3.25). The Indian Ocean shows similar features to the Southern Hemisphere Pacific, with a marked upper ocean (<500 m) fresh bias of order 0.3 PSS-78, and a strong near-surface positive bias of order 0.4 PSS-78 associated with the Arabian Sea (Figure 3.25).For the Southern Ocean in CMIP5, considerable fresh biases exist through the water column, and are most pronounced in the ventilated layers representing the subtropical mode and intermediate water masses (Sallée et al., 2013). A fresh bias in upper and intermediate layers of comparable magnitude is also seen in CMIP6 (Figure 3.25). The structure of the biases in the CMIP6 multi-model mean (which averages across many simulations with differing subsurface geographies and differing Southern Ocean salinity biases (Beadling et al., 2020)) is similar to that evident in the CMIP5 multi-model mean, but with slightly smaller magnitudes. The Arctic Ocean also on average exhibits a surface-enhanced fresh bias in the upper ocean (Figure 3.25), which is much larger than its Southern Hemisphere counterpart.In summary, the structure of the salinity biases in the multi-model mean has not changed substantially between CMIP5 and CMIP6 (medium confidence), though there is limited evidence that the magnitude of subsurface biases has been reduced. Biases are sufficiently small to provide confidence in the utility of CMIP-class models for detection and attribution of ocean salinity.