Governance and governing refer to the structures, processes and actions through which private and public actors interact to address societal goals. This includes formal and informal institutions and the associated norms, rules, laws and procedures for deciding, managing, implementing and monitoring policies and measures at any geographic or political scale, from global to local. Governance systems and the specific societal institutions through which they are organised are crucial to the feasibility and success of climate change adaptation, both in terms of its effectiveness in reducing climate risk and vulnerability, as well as equity (including climate justice), with respect to incremental as well as transformational adaptation. This is why AR6 WGII pays even more attention than previous assessments to governance as an important enabling condition, and to the wide range of new actors beyond governments involved in planning, implementing, monitoring and evaluating adaptation action. The assessments in subsequent chapters of AR6 WGII show that successful and equitable collective adaptation efforts at different levels and scales, based on key principles of iterative risk management, require strong, usually multi-level. governance systems. Multi-level governance refers to the dispersion of governance across multiple levels of jurisdiction and decision making, including global, regional, national and local, as well as trans-regional and trans-national levels (see also WG III Chapter 1). The concept emphasises that modern governance generally consists of, and is more flexible, when there are linkages of governance processes across different scales and levels. Multi-level governance is widely regarded as crucial, particularly for transformational adaptation, defined as ‘adapting to climate change resulting in significant changes in structure or function that go beyond adjusting existing practices including approaches that enable new ways of decision making on adaptation’ (IPCC SR1.5, IPCC, 2018b; see also Section 1.5). The assessment in subsequent chapters also shows that public governance arrangements and institutions support most adaptation for addressing the main climate risks, though the importance of the private sector and community organisations in adaptation is increasing. It also shows that polycentric governance tends to benefit adaptation.The empirical literature on adaptation governance has advanced strongly since AR5. It shows that stronger general governance capabilities are usually associated with more ambitious adaptation plans and more effective implementation of such plans (UNEP, 2014; Chen et al., 2016; Keskitalo and Preston, 2019b: 24; ND-GAIN, 2019; Oberlack, 2017; Oberlack and Eisenack, 2018; Woodruff and Regan, 2019; UNEP, 2018; UNEP et al., 2021). Governance capabilities are, to a significant degree, but not exclusively, a function of available financial resources and technology. They are also a function of social capital and societal institutions, including well-functioning local, regional and national governments, and collaboration among these governmental actors and non-governmental stakeholders, including civil society and the private sector. The literature also points to governance conditions that are likely to enable transformational adaptation (Maor et al., 2017; see also Sections 1.4.4; 1.5; Chapter 17).Existing comparative data for adaptive capacity worldwide is at a rather coarse level of temporal and spatial resolution. It can, nonetheless, provide a very general picture of rates of change in adaptive capacity at the national scale, and differences between countries. Further empirical research is needed to identify the most important predictors of variation across countries and time, though the available data suggests that differing national income and education levels play a major role in accounting for differences in adaptive capacity (Andrijevic et al., 2020). Spatially more resolved (sub-national) data is needed because a large body of case study research suggests that there is strong variation within countries, particularly the large ones (e.g., India, China, Brazil, United States) (Chapter 16; see also Nalau and Verrall, 2021 and Cross-Chapter Box ADAPT). Moreover, higher degrees of adaptive capacity do not mean that adaptation action will follow automatically, nor that it will succeed in terms of equity and effectiveness in reducing vulnerability to climate change and enhancing well-being. How differences across and within countries in climate risk exposure translate into adaptation action, contingent on differences in adaptive capacity, can to some extent be inferred from case studies, but this remains to be studied at a larger, comparable and generalisable scale.Governance capacity constitutes an important enabling condition not only because it facilitates the (efficient) organisation and implementation of adaptation action, but also because it contributes to learning. The latter is central to the process of adaptation as information regarding current and future climate conditions continues to evolve, as does understanding of appropriate response options and the actors involved. In addition, norms, values and practices may change in response to changing conditions (Jones et al., 2014). Much learning by individuals, communities and organisations is unplanned (National Research Council, 2009), as is much current adaptation (Berrang-Ford, 2020), which can reduce near-term costs and administrative complexity, but may prove maladaptive (Section 1.4.2.4). Iterative risk management (Section 1.2.1.1) and related concepts such as risk governance (Renn, 2008) describe a planned learning process of ongoing assessment, action and reassessment. Iterative risk management can be as simple as scheduling future updates of assessments and plans, as with the 5-year updates of the global stocktake after 2023 called for in the Paris Agreement, or encompass more elaborate learning processes, such as dynamic adaptive pathways (Haasnoot et al., 2019b; Cross-Chapter Box DEEP in Chapter 17) which include specific near-term actions, specific trends to monitor and specific contingency actions to take depending on the future conditions observed. While often more effective at meeting goals, such planned learning processes may pose implementation and governance challenges (Metzger et al., 2021)Mainstreaming adaptation into existing governance structures and associated organisations and their investments, policies and practices can contribute to expanding the solution space and support efforts at transformative adaptation. For instance, urban planning can support adaptation by mainstreaming adaptation into city plans, such as land use planning, procuring resilient infrastructure and transportation, supporting health and social services, promoting community-based adaptation, and protecting and integrating biodiversity and ecosystem services into city planning (Section 17.4.3). Mainstreaming adaptation also shows many shortcomings, such as diminishing the visibility of dedicated, stand-alone adaptation approaches (Persson et al., 2016), unequal distribution of adaptation efforts, diluting responsibilities for implementation (Nalau et al., 2016; Reckien et al., 2019), exhibiting disconnects between planning, investment and implementation, having limited policy coherence (Friend et al., 2014; Bizikova et al., 2015; England et al., 2018; Koch, 2018) and failing to adequately balance overlapping and/or competing policy objectives (Vij et al., 2018).Finally, governing adaptation in ways that maximise the solution space and facilitate learning can help avoid maladaptation. Maladaptation refers to potentially adverse effects of certain forms of adaptation action, such as increased GHG emissions or increased vulnerability to climate change and diminished welfare of certain parts of a population now or in the future (Anguelovski et al., 2016; Keskitalo and Pettersson, 2016; Veldkamp et al., 2017; Zimmermann et al., 2018; Benzie et al., 2018; IPCC, 2018b; Munia et al., 2018; Nadin and Roberts, 2018; Prabhakar et al., 2018). Maladaptation is an example of response risk, which is increasingly highlighted in both AR6 WGII and WGIII (Section 1.3.1.2; see also IPCC Risk Guidance, Reisinger, 2020). One example is that adaptation action may set paths that limit the choices of future generations to adapt. This last characteristic refers to the lock-in effects of improperly designed and costly infrastructures that affect the ability of future generations to amend.Maladaptation can result from many potential barriers, including administrative, human, financial and technical resource constraints (Hassanali, 2017; Pardoe et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2018); lack of transparency and/or capacity in governance (Friend et al., 2014); unreliable information on climate impacts and the lack of key policy guidelines (Pilato et al., 2018); entrenched institutional, legal and technical obstacles (Gao, 2018) and low literacy, including environmental and scientific literacy (Wright et al., 2014); exclusion of vulnerable groups (Forsyth, 2018); governance fragmentation (that is, a fragmentation of laws, regulations, and policy requirements); and limited cross-sectoral collaboration, meaning that there is limited coordination and that top-down planning approaches are not connected to local dynamics (Archer et al., 2014; Pardoe et al., 2018). This report draws attention to maladaptation challenges recognising that not all adaptation-related responses reduce risks (Chapter 16). Besides, maladaptation is the opposite of successful adaptation, which is associated with reduction of climate risks and vulnerabilities for humans and ecosystems, increased well-being and co-benefits with other sustainable development objectives. (Chapter 17)