It is commonly assumed that the climate–carbon cycle response to a negative CO2 emission (i.e., removal from the atmosphere) is equal in magnitude and opposite in sign to the response to a positive CO2 emission of equal magnitude – that is, symmetric. If the response were symmetric, a positive CO2 emission could be offset by a negative emission of equal magnitude. This subsection assesses the symmetry in the coupled climate–carbon cycle response in model simulations with positive and negative CO2 emission pulses applied from a pre-industrial climate state. Simulations with seven CMIP6 ESMs and the UVic Earth System Climate Model (ESCM) of intermediate complexity suggest that the carbon cycle response is asymmetric for pulse emissions/removals of ±100 PgC (Figure 5.35). For all models, the fraction of CO2 remaining in the atmosphere after an emission is larger than the fraction of CO2 remaining out of the atmosphere after a removal (by 4 ± 3%; mean ± standard deviation). In other words, an emission of CO2 into the atmosphere is more effective at raising atmospheric CO2 than an equivalent CO2 removal is at lowering it. Sensitivity experiments with the UVic ESCM suggest that the asymmetry increases for larger amounts of emissions/removals and is insensitive to the background atmospheric CO2 concentration from which the emissions/removals are applied (Figure 5.35). This asymmetry in the atmospheric CO2 response originates from asymmetries in the land and ocean carbon fluxes due to non-linearities in the carbon cycle response to CO2 and temperature (Section 5.4) (Zickfeld et al., 2021). Givenmedium evidence and  high agreement, there is medium confidence in the sign of the asymmetry of the carbon cycle response to positive and negative CO2 emissions. The sign of the symmetry of the temperature response differs between models, with three out of seven examined ESMs showing a smaller temperature response to a 100 PgC emission than to an equivalent CO2 removal. Therefore, there is low confidence in the sign of the asymmetry of the temperature response to positive and negative CO2 emissions.Figure 5.35 | Asymmetry in the atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2 ) response to CO2  emissions and removals.  Shown are the fractions of total CO2 emissions remaining in the atmosphere (right-hand side) and CO2 removals remaining out of the atmosphere (left-hand side) 80–100 after a pulse emission/removal. Triangles and green circles denote results for seven Earth system models (ESMs) and the UVic ESCM model of intermediate complexity forced with ±100 PgC pulses applied from a pre-industrial state (1 × CO2) (Carbon Dioxide Removal Model Intercomparison Project (CDRMIP) experiment CDR-pi-pulse; Keller et al., 2018b). Yellow circles and diamonds indicate UVic ESCM results for CO2 emissions/removals applied at 1.5 times (1.5 × CO2) and 2 times (2 × CO2) the pre-industrial CO2 concentration, respectively. Pulses applied from a 2 × CO2 state span the magnitude ±100 PgC to ±500 PgC. UVic ESCM data is from Zickfeld et al. (2021). Further details on data sources and processing are available in the chapter data table (Table 5.SM.6). Open figure