Tracking the implementation of national adaptation plans is essential for understanding their effectiveness, that is, the progress made in addressing climate risks, and can support assessing the success of adaptation and the risk of maladaptation. Over 60 countries have developed or started developing national adaptation M&E systems, although less than half are yet reporting on implementation (Leiter, 2021b; Table 17.8). Country-specific adaptation M&E systems vary considerably regarding their legal mandate, purpose, content, involved actors and types of reporting (Hammill et al., 2014a; EEA, 2015; Leiter, 2015; Leiter et al., 2017a; EEA, 2020). In most cases, they focus primarily on monitoring implementation rather than assessing outcomes, although some are linked to national climate risk or vulnerability assessments (e.g., in Germany and the UK) (EEA, 2018). At least 15 countries have published evaluations of national adaptation plans which help inform the development of successive adaptation plans or strategies (Table 17.8). Nevertheless, there is only limited empirical evidence of the ability of M&E systems to facilitate action or increase the level of ambition of revised policies. More research is needed to determine the quality of national adaptation M&E systems and how well they support the policy cycle.Under the Paris Agreement, countries are encouraged to provide information on adaptation, including its adequacy and effectiveness (Möhner et al., 2017; Adaptation Committee, 2021). National adaptation M&E systems can inform both national as well as international reporting and contribute to the Global Stocktake (see Cross-Chapter Box PROGRESS in this Chapter; Craft and Fisher, 2015; Leiter et al., 2017a). Guidance for and examples of national adaptation progress assessments are provided by Price-Kelly et al. (2015), Brooks et al. (2014), Brooks et al. (2019), EEA (2015), GIZ (2017), Karani (2018) and van Rüth and Schönthaler (2018). Global assessments of adaptation progress have so far often focused on adaptation planning and, to a lesser extent, implementation, while evidence of the collective effect of adaptation globally remains limited (high confidence) (UNEP, 2021a; Cross-Chapter Box PROGRESS in this Chapter).Table 17.8 | Countries in different stages of developing or operating a national adaptation M&E system as of 1 August 2021 (Source: Leiter, 2021b). Countries can appear twice if they have published both a progress report and an evaluation.National adaptation M&E systemStageDefinitionCountryUnder developmentEarly stageTangible steps have been undertaken to develop a national adaptation M&E system, for example a stocktake of relevant existing data sources and engagement with stakeholders on the objectives of the M&E systemBenin, Cook Islands, Jordan, Paraguay, Sri Lanka, UgandaAdvanced stageDetails of the adaptation M&E system have been developed, including, for instance, institutional arrangements, indicators and data sources, but it has not yet been appliedAlbania, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Colombia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Grenada, Indonesia, Moldova, Morocco, Mozambique, Nauru, Peru, Rwanda, Senegal, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Turkey, VietnamIn operationAdaptation progress report publishedA progress report on the implementation of the national adaptation plan or strategy has been publishedAustria, Belgium (Flanders), Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Chile, Cyprus, France, Germany, Japan, Kenya, Kiribati, Lithuania, Mexico, the Netherlands (Delta Programme), Norway, Portugal, Slovakia, Spain, South Africa, South Korea, Switzerland, UKEvaluation publishedAn evaluation of the implementation of the national adaptation plan or strategy has been undertaken and publishedBelgium, Cambodia, Chile, Czech Republic, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Mexico, the Netherlands, Philippines, South Korea, Spain, Switzerland, UK