Historically, southern coastal Bangladesh, where the 1970 Bhola Cyclone killed 500,000 people, has been considered among the most climate-vulnerable environments on Earth. However, in recent decades, extreme weather events, like Cyclone Aila, though still destructive and destabilising, have resulted in lower death tolls thanks to a concerted investment in flood mitigation infrastructure, a dense network of cyclone shelters and a robust early warning system (Chowdhury et al., 1993; Paul, 2009). Cyclone Aila struck the southwest coast of Bangladesh on 25 May 2009 with a wind speed of 120 km hour –1 (Islam and Hasan, 2016). With tidal surges of up to 6.5 m, occurring over dry pre-monsoon soils, 11 coastal districts and more than 3.9 million people were affected (United Nations, 2010), 190 people died and 7100 people suffered injuries (Saha, 2017).Aila greatly damaged the region’s physical capital, including 6000 km of roads and 17,000 km of embankments. The cyclone polluted and damaged sources of drinking water and destroyed 243,000 houses and thousands of schools (Mallick et al., 2017; Paul and Chatterjee, 2019). In Satkhira and Khulna districts alone, 165,000 houses were destroyed and households were forced to live on damaged embankments in makeshift shanties (UNDP, 2015). Many people had to live in these temporary shelters for years (Saha, 2017). Aila occurred during a high tide and the surge of saline water inundated not only the roads, embankments and houses but also vast areas of agricultural field and shrimp farms (Paul and Chatterjee, 2019) leaving many areas waterlogged for months (Abdullah et al., 2016; Mallick et al., 2017). The effect of saline water logging inside embankments caused further harm to houses, roads and culverts, adding more barriers to the post-disaster reconstruction activities (Roy, 2020). In the same area, tube-wells were damaged. Women had to travel up to 2 km every day to collect safe water, spending 30–90 minutes on this activity daily (Alam and Rahman, 2019). The distribution of costs across different socioeconomic groups was not always as expected. A study in Aila-affected Koyra sub-district of Khulna found that households with higher incomes were more vulnerable to Aila in both relative and absolute terms compared to middle- and low-income groups mainly due to damage to shrimp farming, which underpinned their livelihoods (Abdullah et al., 2016). This highlights how specialised livelihoods can leave people more vulnerable as they have fewer options. However, the same study found that the damage to physical capital such as fishing nets and boats was statistically significantly greater for middle- and low-income groups. Damage to houses was statistically significantly more among poorer households followed by middle- and higher-income groups.A range of coping and adaptation actions were enacted in response to losses of and damage to physical capital (Table Box 8.8.1). Actions varied across the different affected areas and were taken by the households themselves, by the government and by NGOs.Table Box 8.8.1 | Coping and adaptation actions enacted in the Cyclone Aila-affected area in response to losses of and damage to physical capital. Coping and adaptation actionsAction groupReferencesHuman migration—mostly forced due to loss of houses as well as other resources and livelihood activitiesHouseholds(Abdullah et al., 2016; Mallick et al., 2017; Paul and Chatterjee, 2019)Alternative livelihood activities such as crafts, and honey and wood collection from the Sundarbans, due to irreparable damage to fishing gearHouseholds(Alam et al., 2015)Saving money for house repairs or constructionHouseholds(Alam et al., 2015)Underground storage of emergency items such as foods, matchbox, cooker and cooking fuelHouseholds(Alam et al., 2015)Selection of high land to build shelter along both sides of the embankmentsHouseholds(Alam et al., 2015)Tree plantation in the homestead periphery to protect the house from gusty winds and to use as a source of wood for house repair/constructionHouseholds(Alam et al., 2015)Increasing height of the house plinthHouseholds(Alam et al., 2015)Changing of house roofing material from thatched to corrugated iron sheet or asbestosHouseholds(Alam et al., 2015)Informally allowing people to harvest Sundarbans forest wood without any charge so they could make makeshift housesForest Department(Abdullah et al., 2016)Rainwater harvesting using plastic or clay pots and artificial aquifer tube-wells for securing drinking water.NGOs and households(Sultana and Mallick, 2015)Replacement of mud walls of houses with wood or bamboo sticks to enhance durabilityNGOs and households(Sultana and Mallick, 2015)Making thick shelterbelts along coastal embankmentsNGOs and households(Rahman and Rahman, 2015)The impacts of some of these adaptations, particularly engagement in new livelihood activities after Aila, were varied, with income of the affected households increasing in some cases and decreasing in others. In Koyra, the income of the poorest and middle-income households increased by 16% and 4%, respectively, while the income of richer households (many of whom lost physical capital assets that they used to pursue their livelihoods) decreased by 50% (Abdullah et al., 2016).Research into adaptation projects led by various actors has shown that adaptations taken by the households and community themselves are effective only to address typical challenges (such as seasonal shifts in temperature or rainfall) but are less effective in addressing extreme events that have long-lasting impacts. This is mainly due to lack of adequate resources and institutional support (Alam et al., 2015). At the same time, some coping mechanisms are harmful in the longer term, for example, harvesting Sundarbans forest wood after Aila for reconstruction could have negative impacts on the forest.As of 2017, many of the affected areas had not yet been able to recover from the effects of Aila (Paul and Chatterjee, 2019). A transformative approach needs to be taken not only to help them recover in livelihood terms, but also to support people’s well-being. Suggestions of physical interventions that are needed include higher and stronger dykes, cyclone-resistant housing, active maintenance and strict policing of embankment use and good governance (Abdullah et al., 2016). Enabling formal institutions could help, for instance, by improving the climate resilience of physical capital (e.g., by developing and enforcing building codes for houses). Other institutional mechanisms could help to improve access to low interest credit, prevent maladaptation, improve enforcement of laws, and provide insurance. However, such institutional reforms need to be co-developed with local people and incorporate local cultural mechanisms (Islam and Nursey-Bray, 2017). Future adaptation strategies also need to consider the limits to autonomous adaptation (i.e. that without external intervention) and differential level of impacts and adaptive capacities among different groups of households in the Aila-affected areas. This example illustrates the importance of a more comprehensive approach to resilience building, and the need to better understand the interlinkages between the core components of an enabling environment for adaptation (see Figure 8.12).Box 8.8