Many adaptation responses are not documented,  and reporting bias is a key challenge for assessment of observed responses. Evidence of absence (i.e., where no adaptations are occurring) is different from absence of evidence (where responses are occurring but are not documented), with implications for understanding trends in global responses.Adaptation is being reported differently across different sources of knowledge. The peer-reviewed literature, for example, has been primarily reporting reactive adaptation at the individual, household and community levels, while the grey literature has been more mixed, reporting adaptation across governmental levels and civil society, with less focus on individuals and households (Ford et al., 2015a; Ford and King, 2015). Synthesis of impacts and responses within the private sector is particularly limited (Averchenkova et al., 2016; Minx et al., 2017), further suggesting that knowledge accumulation on climate responses has been particularly slow, and that more robust evidence synthesis is required to fill key knowledge gaps.The potential for under-reporting is most acute in the context of minorities and remote and marginalised groups, who are often also the most affected by the impacts of climate change and least able to respond to, or benefit from, the responses to climate change (Araos et al., 2021). Deficits in reporting on impacts and responses are well recognised in the Global South, among vulnerable populations (e.g., women, socioeconomically disadvantaged, Indigenous, people living with disabilities) and within civil society (ibid.).There is growing support for more comprehensive and systematic approaches to assess adaptation progress (Berrang-Ford et al., 2015; Ford et al., 2015a; Ford and King, 2015; Ford and Berrang-Ford, 2016; Biesbroek et al., 2018). Since the AR5, there is increased recognition of the value of integrating diverse knowledge sources to fill knowledge gaps in observation of impacts and responses (Chapter 17; Cross-Chapter Box PROGRESS in Chapter 17). Van Bavel, for example, found that the involvement of local and diverse knowledge can improve the detection (medium confidence) and attribution (medium confidence) of health impacts, and improve the action (high confidence) (Van Bavel et al., 2020).A new development since AR5, there is now growing evidence assessing progress on adaptation across sectors, geographies and spatial scales. Uncertainty persists around what defines adaptation and how to measure it (Cross-Chapter Box FEASIB in Chapter 18, UNEP, 2021). As a result, most literature synthesising responses is based on documented or reported adaptations only, and is thus subject to substantial reporting bias.We document implemented adaptation-related responses that could directly reduce risk. Adaptation as a process is more broadly covered in Chapter 17 (Section 17.4.2), including risk management, decision making, planning, feasibility (see Cross-Chapter Box FEASIB in Chapter 18), legislation and learning. Here, we focus on a subset of adaptation activities: adaptation-related responses of species, ecosystems, and human societies that have been implemented and observed, and could directly reduce risk. We consider all adaptation-related responses to assumed, perceived or expected climate risk, regardless of whether or not impacts or risks have been formally attributed to climate change.We use the term ‘adaptation-related responses’, recognising that not all responses reduce risk. While ‘adaptation’ implies risk reduction, we use the broader term ‘responses’ to reflect that responses may decrease risk, but in some cases may increase risk.Given limited evidence to inform comprehensive global assessment of effectiveness and adequacy, we assess evidence that adaptation responses in human systems indicate transformational change. Chapter 17 considers adaptation planning and governance, including adaptation solutions, success, and feasibility assessment (Cross-Chapter Box FEASIB in Chapter 18). It is not currently possible to conduct a comprehensive global assessment of effectiveness, adequacy or the contribution of adaptation-related responses to changing risk due to an absence of robust empirical literature (discussed further in Cross-Chapter Box PROGRESS in Chapter 17).In natural ecosystems or species, detectable changes can be considered as ‘impact’ or ‘response’. The distinction between ‘observed impacts’ (Section 16.2) and ‘observed responses’ (Section 16.3) is not always clear. For example, autonomous distributional shifts in wild species induced by increasing temperatures (an observed impact) may reduce risk to the species (an autonomous adaptation response), but this process can be enhanced or supported by human intervention such as intentional changes in land use. Observed autonomous changes in natural ecosystems or species unsupported by human intervention are treated as impacts (see Section 16.2).Adaptation-related responses are frequently motivated by a combination of climatic and non-climatic drivers, and interact with other transitions to affect risk. For societal responses, it is difficult to say whether they are triggered by observed or anticipated changes in climate, by non-climatic drivers or, as is the case in many societal responses, by a combination of all three. In the case of impacts, assessment typically focuses on detection and attribution vis à vis a counterfactual of no climate change. While there has been some effort to attribute reduced climate risk to adaptation-related responses (Toloo et al., 2013a; Toloo et al., 2013b; Hess et al., 2018; Weinberger et al., 2018), in many cases this has not been feasible given difficulties in defining adaptation and empirically disentangling the contribution of intersecting social transitions and changing risks. Literature on adaptation-related response frequently draws on theories of change to assess the likely contribution of adaptations to changes in risk, including maladaptation and co-benefits.