An inclusive, equitable approach to integrating adaptation, mitigation and development can advance sustainable development in the long term (high confidence). Integrated responses can harness synergies for sustainable development and reduce trade-offs (high confidence). Shifting development pathways towards sustainability and advancing climate resilient development is enabled when governments, civil society and the private sector make development choices that prioritise risk reduction, equity and justice, and when decision-making processes, finance and actions are integrated across governance levels, sectors and timeframes (very high confidence) (see also Figure 4.2). Inclusive processes involving local knowledge and Indigenous Knowledge increase these prospects (high confidence). However, opportunities for action differ substantially among and within regions, driven by historical and ongoing patterns of development (very high confidence). Accelerated financial support for developing countries is critical to enhance mitigation and adaptation action (high confidence). {. GII SPM C.5.4, WGII SPM D.1, WGII SPM D.1.1, WGII SPM D.1.2, WGII SPM D.2, WGII SPM D.3, WGII SPM D.5, WGII SPM D.5.1, WGII SPM D.5.2; WGIII SPM D.1, WGIII SPM D.2, WGIII SPM D.2.4, WGIII SPM E.2.2, WGIII SPM E.2.3, WGIII SPM E.5.3, WGIII Cross-Chapter Box 5}.Policies that shift development pathways towards sustainability can broaden the portfolio of available mitigation and adaptation responses (medium confidence)  . Combining mitigation with action to shift development pathways, such as broader sectoral policies, approaches that induce lifestyle or behaviour changes, financial regulation, or macroeconomic policies can overcome barriers and open up a broader range of mitigation options (high confidence). Integrated, inclusive planning and investment in everyday decision-making about urban infrastructure can significantly increase the adaptive capacity of urban and rural settlements. Coastal cities and settlements play an important role in advancing climate resilient development due to the high number of people living in the Low Elevation Coastal Zone, the escalating and climate compounded risk that they face, and their vital role in national economies and beyond (high confidence). {WGII SPM.D.3, WGII SPM D.3.3; WGIII SPM E.2, WGIII SPM E.2.2; SR1.5 SPM D.6}Observed adverse impacts and related losses and damages, projected risks, trends in vulnerability, and adaptation limits demonstrate that transformation for sustainability and climate resilient development action is more urgent than previously assessed (very high confidence). Climate resilient development integrates adaptation and GHG mitigation to advance sustainable development for all. Climate resilient development pathways have been constrained by past development, emissions and climate change and are progressively constrained by every increment of warming, in particular beyond 1.5°C (very high confidence). Climate resilient development will not be possible in some regions and sub-regions if global warming exceeds 2°C (medium confidence). Safeguarding biodiversity and ecosystems is fundamental to climate resilient development, but biodiversity and ecosystem services have limited capacity to adapt to increasing global warming levels, making climate resilient development progressively harder to achieve beyond 1.5°C warming. (very high confidence). {WGII SPM D.1, WGII SPM D.1.1, WGII SPM D.4, WGII SPM D.4.3, WGII SPM D.5.1; WGIII SPM D.1.1}.The cumulative scientific evidence is unequivocal: climate change is a threat to human well-being and planetary health (very high confidence). Any further delay in concerted anticipatory global action on adaptation and mitigation will miss a brief and rapidly closing window of opportunity to secure a liveable and sustainable future for all (very high confidence). Opportunities for near-term action are assessed in the following section. {WGII SPM D.5.3; WGIII SPM D.1.1}