The chapter is organised around the broad narrative of climate risk decision-making and management (Figure 17.1), building from the assessment of risks within RKRs (Chapter 16) and options available to address these risks and within a broader context of climate resilient development pathways (Chapter 18). Decision-making is considered to be a reflexive and recursive process where different evidentiary threads and information inputs become relevant to the understanding and assessment of factors underlying specific decisions. Additionally, this is also a discursive process, whereby actors and institutions’ interpretations of climate risks are also key to these deliberations.Decision-making processes of risk management and adaptation are varied and numerous. Section 17.2 assesses the risk management and adaptation options already in practice. Section 17.3 assesses decision-support methods and tools available for application and the effectiveness of these in supporting climate decision-making across degrees of uncertainties and levels of governance and expected reach (scale) across populations from households to international cooperation. Closely interlinked across the decision-making process are the enabling and catalysing conditions for decisions on adaptation and risk management (Section 17.4). Section 17.5 synthesises evidence on maladaptation and adaptation successes, and assesses the current knowledge on M&E of adaptation, including financial accounting, to support learning on those, respectively. Here, M&E is considered distinct from the tracking of financial flows related to adaptation, given that financial accounting does not necessarily provide information on the implementation of adaptation measures and their results (see also Section 17.2.1.2). Finally, in Section 17.6, decision-making, climate risk responses and their relevance for climate resilient development are presented, where evidence on their respective contributions to facilitate actions in the adaptation solution space within a broader context for development is shown (Chapter 18). Throughout the decision-making process, crucial feedback loops are present that define the results of specific actions and recursive nature of climate risk management and adaptation.