CRDPs to reduce conflict risk rely on a shift in perspective from framings around resource scarcity and security to sustainable natural resource governance and peace (Brauch et al., 2016; Barnett, 2018; Dresse et al., 2018; Day and Caus, 2020). Recognising that conflict results from underlying vulnerabilities, development that reduces vulnerability offers the best win-win option for building sustainable, climate-resilient peace rather than specific security-focused interventions  (high confidence). To this end, meeting the SDGs represents an unambiguous path to reducing conflict risk in a climate-changed world (Singh and Chudasama, 2021). There is growing acceptance in the development community, despite reservations about the securitisation of climate, that instability and conflict exacerbated by climate change has the potential to undermine development gains (Casado-Asensio et al., 2020; Day and Caus, 2020).Core to achieving climate-resilient peace are new ways of working that involve cross-issue and cross-sectoral collaboration and integration as a default to policy and programming. The Security Council Resolution 1325 Women and peace and security (S/RES/1325 (2000)) and the Sustaining Peace Agenda (A/RES/70/262 (2016)) are notable examples of this. The 2020 UNEP report on gender and security recommends integrated policy frameworks, better financing to strengthen women’s roles in peacebuilding, integrated programme design, and further research on gender, climate and security linkages. Inclusive approaches recognise that much of the vulnerability that drives conflict risk is generated by existing inequality and marginalisation of large proportions of the population—for example women and youth—and that peace cannot be achieved without their needs being taken into account and without their participation in peace processes (Mosello et al., 2021). Diverse and inclusive partnerships also require ways to better engage local-level participation, and improve understanding of how to build consensus through human rights-based approaches that recognize non-violent conflict and protest to be potentially positive and constructive elements of transformational approaches to building resilience (Nursey-Bray, 2017; Ensor et al., 2018; Schipper et al., 2021). Addressing the lack of participation of researchers and experts from countries most at risk of conflict in many climate-related conflict and peacebuilding assessments and initiatives could also support this objective. There is an increasing focus on the role of environmental defenders in highlighting violations and gaps in state obligations through non-violent protest (Butt et al., 2019; Scheidel et al., 2020).CRDPs for sustainable peace also require different ways of gathering intelligence and informing conflict risk. Dynamics that affect such risks exist across scales from the local to the regional, and require response in a transboundary manner. There is increasing emphasis on engaging local stakeholders and diverse partnerships to inform context appropriate measures and better policy coordination (Bremberg et al., 2019; Tshimanga et al., 2021; Abrahams, 2020). The UN’s Climate Security Mechanism, working across three UN departments, takes an integrated approach to analyse and support timely and appropriate responses to conflict risk, focusing on risk assessments and early warning systems to aid conflict prevention, climate-informed peace and security activities and conflict-sensitive development, and to promote inter-sectoral cooperation, partnership and information sharing (DPPA et al., 2020). There is already acknowledgement that adaptation needs to be effectively monitored so that maladaptation can be avoided (Eriksen et al., 2021). Here, academic research, which until now has predominantly focused on understanding the causal relationship between conflict and climate, could contribute to advancing the monitoring and evaluation of climate-resilient peacebuilding initiatives (Mach et al., 2020; Gilmore et al., 2018).