Multiple lines of evidence indicate that climate change is already contributing to more intense and more frequent extreme events across North America. The impacts resulting from extreme events represent a huge challenge for adapting to future climate change. Extreme events are a fundamental part of how we experience weather and climate. Exceptionally hot days, torrential rainfall and other extreme weather events have a direct impact on people, communities and ecosystems. Extreme weather can lead to other impactful events such as droughts, floods or wildfires. In a changing climate, people frequently ask whether extreme events are generally becoming more severe or more frequent, and whether an actual extreme event was caused by climate change.Because really extreme events occur rarely (by definition), it can be very difficult to assess whether the overall severity or frequency of such events has been affected by changing climate. Nevertheless, careful statistical analysis shows that record-setting hot temperatures in North America are occurring more often than record-setting cold temperatures as the overall climate has gotten warmer in recent decades. The area burned by large wildfires in the western USA has increased in recent decades. Observed trends in extreme precipitation events are more difficult to detect with confidence, because the natural variability of precipitation is so large and the observational database is limited.Our understanding of how individual extreme weather events have been influenced by climate change has improved greatly in recent years. Climate scientists have developed a formal technique (‘event attribution’, described in WGI FAQ 11.3) for assessing how climate change affects the severity or frequency of a particular extreme event, such as a record-breaking rainfall event or a marine heatwave. This is a challenging task, because any particular event can be caused by a combination of natural variability and climate change. Event attribution is typically carried out using models to compare the probability of a specific event occurring in today’s climatic environment relative to the probability that the same event might have occurred in a modelled climate in which atmospheric GHGs have not risen due to human activities. Using this strategy, multiple studies have estimated that the historically extreme rainfall amount that fell across the Houston area from Hurricane Harvey (2017) was three to ten times more likely  as the result of climate change.The impacts from extreme events depend not just on physical climate system hazards (temperature, precipitation, wind, etc.), but also on the exposure and vulnerability of humans or ecosystems to these events. For example, damage from land-falling hurricanes along the coast of the Gulf of Mexico is expected to increase as very strong hurricanes become more frequent and intense due to climate change. But damage would also increase with additional construction along the shoreline, because coastal development increases exposure to hurricanes. And if some structures are constructed to poor building standards, as was the case when hurricane Andrew made landfall in Florida in 1992, then vulnerability to hurricane-caused impacts is increased.Climate change also contributes to impacts from extreme events by making some building codes and zoning restrictions inadequate or obsolete. Many North American communities limit development in areas known to be flood-prone, to minimise exposure to flooding. But as climate change expands the areas at risk of exposure to flooding beyond historical floodplains, the impacts of potential flooding are increased, as Hurricane Harvey demonstrated. Adapting to climate change may require retrofits for existing structures and revised zoning for new construction. Some structures and neighbourhoods may need to be abandoned altogether to accommodate expanded flooding risk.Climate change can be an added stress that increases impacts from extreme events, combined with other non-climatic stressors. For example, climate change in western North America has contributed to more extreme fire weather. The devastating impacts of recent wildfire outbreaks, such as occurred across western Canada in 2016 and 2017, the western United States in 2018 and 2020, and both countries in 2021, are to some extent associated with expanded development and forest management practices (such as policies to suppress low-intensity fires, allowing fuel to accumulate). The effects of development and forest management have dramatically increased the exposure and vulnerability of communities to intense wildfires. Climate change has added to these stressors: warming temperature leads to more extreme weather conditions that are conducive to increasingly severe wildfires.Biodiversity is affected by climate change in this way too. For example, numerous bird populations across North America are estimated to have declined by up to 30% over the past half-century. Multiple human-related factors, including habitat loss and agricultural intensification, contribute to these declines, with climate change as an added stressor. Increasingly extreme events, such as severe storms and wildfires, can decimate local populations of birds, adding to existing ecological threats.