This chapter utilises several points of departure to assess climate risk management that emerge from AR5 and AR6, specifically. SR Climate Change and Land, especially Chapter 7 (IPCC, 2019b; Hurlbert et al., 2019) and throughout SROCC (). These works provide foundational assessment of evidence on decision-making systems that connect different spatial and temporal scales and diverse cultural contexts in which climate risk management takes place, the varying interactions of decision makers and their stakeholder groups, and the barriers and enablers to decision-making, including governance, finance and knowledge (Section 17.4).Another significant advance is that, instead of cataloguing decision-making strategies, the literature has now evolved to the point where adaptation progress, effectiveness and efficiency can be more meaningfully assessed through increased monitoring and evaluation capacity, although the ability to measure success and effectiveness is not fully developed and is hampered by lack of data, agreed methods and terms, and time to fully evaluate adaptation actions (see Sections 17.3.3 and 17.5, Cross-Chapter Box PROGRESS in this Chapter). The ambition to describe effectiveness and success illustrates further maturation of the literature on climate risk decision-making as a system process. Overall, the process of climate risk decision-making remains dynamic, and the chapter attempts to assess a variety of proactive management approaches being developed and tested to address adverse, diverse and complex risks in a wide range of developing and developed country contexts (Figure 17.1). The chapter provides a synthesis of how these new approaches are reflected in the sectoral and regional chapters and cross-chapter papers of this report (Chapters 2–15; Cross-Chapter Papers 1–7). Specifically, the goal is to provide a line of sight between the sectoral and regional chapters and cross-chapter papers’ decision-making assessment to sections in this chapter. This synthesis also helps to present the varying and context-driven character of adaptation strategies now in practice and being considered.Figure 17.1 | Schematic representation of the climate risk management decision-making process as introduced in Chapter 1 (Figure 1. 6) and the key elements of this chapter that address additional aspects of this process. In Chapter 17, climate risk management (middle box) is framed as the iterative response (i.e., what society could do and how it could be done) to the climate risks described in Chapter 16, with outcomes (ideally reduced risk) that can support (or perhaps hinder) climate resilient development, as assessed in Chapter 18. Decision makers from diverse contexts sit at the centre of the climate risk decision-making process and interact with and drive these processes as they play out. The main sections of Chapter 17 (bottom panel of boxes) address a wide range of issues (keywords in bottom panel) that manifest at one or more stages of climate risk management processes, illustrated by icons for section numbers and Cross-Chapter Boxes in the interactive risk management process.Open figure 