As climate change is a multi-scale phenomenon, from the local to the global, the assessment of climate risks and climate change impacts is strongly spatial, with a focus on regional climate change. The term ‘regions’ is used in different ways throughout the AR6 assessment as the use of the term varies across disciplines and context.First, there are chapters dedicated to regional assessment in AR6 WGII (Chapters 9–14 and Cross-Chapter Papers 4 and 6). Within the content of these and other chapters of AR6, the term region is often used to describe continental and sub-continental regions, oceanic regions, hemispheres, or more specific localities within these geographic areas. Building on the continental domains defined in AR5 WGII and to ensure consistency with WGI Chapter 12 (Ranasinghe et al., 2021) and the WGIAtlas (Gutiérrez et al., 2021), AR6 WGII uses a continental set of regions, namely Africa, Asia, Australasia, Europe, North America, Central and South America, Small Islands, Polar Regions and the Ocean.Second, the term regions is used to categorise areas around the globe with common topographical characteristics or biological characteristics. For example, Chapter 2 introduces regions in its discussion of biomes, as in arid, grassland, savanna, tundra, tropical, temperate and boreal forested regions. Chapter 3 adds reference to an area’s orientation with bodies of water, using terms such as deltaic, coastal, intercoastal, freshwater and salty. In addition, Cross-Chapter Paper 2 uses a coastal region typology based on physical geomorphology considering elevation, coastal type and topography (see Cross-Chapter Paper 2, p. 5; Barragán and de Andrés, 2015; Kay and and Adler, 2017; Haasnoot et al., 2019a).Third, CCPs are dedicated to typological regions, defined in the Annex II: Glossary as regions that share one or more specific features (known as ‘typologies’), such as geographic location (e.g., coastal), physical processes (e.g., monsoons), biological (e.g., coral reefs, tropical forests, deserts), geological (e.g., mountains) or anthropogenic (e.g., megacities), and for which it is useful to consider the common climate features. Typological regions are generally discontinuous (such as monsoon areas, mountains, deserts and megacities) and are specifically used to integrate across similar climatological, geological and human domains.Understanding climate risks across regions also requires consideration of the capabilities of developing countries and scientists across country contexts in conducting climate assessments. Substantial unevenness of available climate observations, risks assessments and scientific literature across regions and country capacities substantially challenges a globally comprehensive assessment (Connelly et al., 2018).