The SDGs are globally agreed objectives that integrate the economic, environmental and social aspects of sustainable development to end poverty, protect nature and ensure that all people enjoy peace and prosperity. The SDGs were developed under the principle that the goals are integrated and indivisible, such that progress in one goal depends on progress in others (WHO, 2016b). Promoting health and well-being is not the sole responsibility of the health sector; it is also partially determined by strategies, policies and options such as poverty reduction, promoting gender equality, ensuring all people enjoy peace and prosperity, eliminating nutritional insecurity and ensuring availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation (Morton et al., 2019; Bennett et al., 2020). Unique themes in the SDGs for health policy and systems research include social protection, access to health services, stronger and more effective multi-sectoral collaborations beyond the health sector to address the upstream drivers of health and well-being, and participatory and accountable institutions to strengthen civic engagement and local accountability within health systems (Bennett et al., 2020).For example, clean water, sanitation and hygiene are essential to human health and well-being. Unsafe water and sanitation and a lack of hygiene caused an estimated 870,000 associated deaths in 2016 (WHO, 2021c). Only 71% of the global population has access to safely managed drinking water services; only 45% of the global population has access to safely managed sanitation services; and 60% has basic handwashing facilities in their home. About 25% of healthcare facilities lack basic water services, exposing workers and patients to higher infection risks. More than 80% of countries reported in 2018 that they lacked sufficient funding to meet national WASH targets. As detailed in Section 7.2.2.2, Box 7.3, Section 7.3.1.4 and Section 7.4.2.3, the burden of climate-sensitive WBDs would be reduced if WASH targets were met.WHO developed a Global Action Plan for Healthy Lives and Well-Being for All that brings together multi-lateral health, development and humanitarian agencies to support countries in accelerating progress towards the health-related SDGs (WHO, 2021c). Themes include sustainable financing to reduce unmet needs for services, community and civil society engagement to generate knowledge to inform policymaking and health responses, addressing the socioenvironmental determinants of health, ensuring health and humanitarian services are available in fragile and vulnerable settings, research and development, and greater implementation of digital health delivery. In 2020, enhanced collaboration through the Global Action Plan provided support for an equitable recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic in, for example, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Pakistan, Tajikistan, Somalia, South Sudan, Malawi, Nepal and Columbia, highlighting the potential for multi-sectoral integration of economic, environmental and social aspects of sustainable development to maintain essential health services and core public health functions during shocks and stresses (WHO, 2021a).Meeting the SDGs also contributes towards reducing involuntary displacement and conflict, as assessed in Sections 7.4.6.6 and 7.4.6.7.