AR5 concluded that there is robust evidence that mutual integration and co-production of local, traditional and scientific knowledge increase adaptive capacity and reduce vulnerability (Adger and Pulhin, 2014). SROCC stated with medium confidence that IKLK provide context-specific and socioculturally relevant understandings for effective climate change responses and policies (Abram et al., 2019). SRCCL found that IKLK contribute to enhancing resilience against climate change and combating desertification (medium confidence). The combination of IKLK with new sustainable land management techniques, SRCCL stated with high confidence, can contribute to raising resilience to the challenges of climate change and desertification (Mirzabaev et al., 2019).There is high confidence that adaptation efforts benefit from the inclusion of IKLK (Mustonen et al., 2021). IKLK can inform how climate change impacts and risks are understood and experienced. Holders of IKLK can also help to develop place-based and culturally appropriate adaptation strategies that meet their community’s expectations (Comberti et al., 2019; Martinez Moscoso, 2019) (Cross-Chapter Box INDIG in Chapter 18).There is high confidence that genuine partnerships with Indigenous Peoples and local communities can assist in decolonising approaches to freshwater management (Arsenault et al., 2019; Wilson et al., 2019), which recognise the importance of knowledge that is not grounded on the technocratic division between nature and society (Goldman et al., 2018). There is also high confidence that Indigenous Peoples-led freshwater management can facilitate culturally inclusive decision-making and collaborative planning processes at the local and national levels (Somerville, 2014; Harmsworth et al., 2016; Parsons et al., 2017). However, market-based models of water rights regimes can impede the ability of Indigenous Peoples to exercise their rights and deploy traditional ecological knowledge regarding freshwater protection (Nursey-Bray and Palmer, 2018) (medium evidence, high agreement ).Community-led actions and restoration measures are helping to ameliorate climate impacts and provide ‘safe havens’ to affected freshwater species (high confidence). For example, the Skolt Sámi of Finland have introduced adaptation measures to aid survival of culturally significant Atlantic salmon stocks in the Näätämö watershed. Atlantic salmon had declined as northern pike, which preys on juvenile salmon, expanded its range in response to warmer water temperatures. Indigenous co-management measures included increasing the catch of pike and documenting important sites (such as lost spawning beds) to ensure that ecological restoration encourages further habitat and increased salmon reproduction (Pecl et al., 2017; Mustonen and Feodoroff, 2018).Community-led applications of IKLK in conjunction with external knowledge and funding can improve water security (high confidence). For example, Borana pastoralists in Ethiopia (Iticha and Husen, 2019) and Ati and Suludnon people (Philippines) (Nelson et al., 2019) utilise both IK and technical information for weather forecasting, while Calanguya people (Philippines) collaborated with local government and nongovernmental organisations (NGOs) to diversify crops and protect the watershed (Gabriel and Mangahas, 2017). With assistance from municipalities, Indigenous Peoples are rehabilitating springs and traditional water wells in Bangladesh hill tracts (Sultana et al., 2019) and Micronesia (McLeod et al., 2019). In response to changing cryospheric conditions in the Peruvian Andes, indigenous Quechua farmers use IK and technical information in community-led research to preserve biocultural knowledge and emblematic crops (Sayre et al., 2017). In Galena, Alaska (USA), a flood-preparedness and response programme has benefitted from the long-term cooperation between emergency management and tribal officials (Kontar et al., 2015) (12.5.3.2 Main concepts and approaches). IKLK can enhance the visibility of Indigenous Peoples and local communities that are excluded from official decision-making processes. In southwest Burkina Faso, for example, Indigenous Peoples are using IKLK to balance (and sometimes resist) official technical estimates of water availability, which enhances their political visibility and enables them to address water scarcity (Roncoli et al., 2019).There are structural and institutional challenges in knowledge co-production between holders of IKLK and ‘technical’ knowledge. These challenges include issues of water rights, language, extractive research practices (Ford et al., 2016; Simms et al., 2016; Stefanelli et al., 2017; Arsenault et al., 2019) and colonial uses of IKLK (Castleden et al., 2017), which can produce distrust among holders of IKLK (David-Chavez and Gavin, 2018). In addition, some IK is sacred and cannot be shared with outsiders (Sanderson et al., 2015).In summary, IKLK are dynamic and have developed over time to adapt to climate and environmental change in culturally specific and place-based ways (high confidence). Ethical co-production between holders of IKLK and technical knowledge is a key enabling condition for successful adaptation measures and strategies pertaining to water security, as well as other areas (medium evidence, high agreement ). Knowledge co-production is a vital and developing approach to the water-related impacts of climate change that recognises the culture, agency and concerns of Indigenous Peoples and local communities. It is critical to developing effective, equitable and meaningful strategies for addressing the water-related impacts of global warming (Cross-Chapter Box INDIG in Chapter 18).