Mitigation and adaptation actions have more synergies than trade-offs with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Synergies and trade-offs depend on context and scale of implementation. Potential trade-offs can be compensated or avoided with additional policies, investments and financial partnerships. (high confidence)  Many mitigation and adaptation actions have multiple synergies with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), but some actions can also have trade-offs. Potential synergies with SDGs exceed potential trade-offs.  Synergies and trade-offs are context specific and depend on: means and scale of implementation, intra- and inter-sectoral interactions, cooperation between countries and regions, the sequencing, timing and stringency of actions, governance, and policy design. Eradicating extreme poverty, energy poverty, and providing decent living standards to all, consistent with near-term sustainable development objectives, can be achieved without significant global emissions growth. (high confidence) {WGII SPM C.2.3, WGIIFigure SPM.4b; WGIII SPM B.3.3, WGIII SPM C.9.2, WGIII SPM D.1.2, WGIII SPM D.1.4, WGIII Figure SPM.8}. (Figure 4.5)Figure 4.5: Potential synergies and trade-offs between the portfolio ofclimate change mitigation and adaptation options and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). This figure presents a high-level summary of potential synergies and trade-offs assessed in WGII Figure SPM.4b and WGIII Figure SPM.8, based on the qualitative and quantitative assessment of each individual mitigation or option. The SDGs serve as an analytical framework for the assessment of different sustainable development dimensions, which extend beyond the time frame of 2030 SDG targets. Synergies and trade-offs across all individual options within a sector/system are aggregated into sector/system potentials for the whole mitigation or adaptation portfolio. The length of each bar represents the total number of mitigation or adaptation options under each system/sector. The number of adaptation and mitigation options vary across system/sector, and have been normalised to 100% so that bars are comparable across mitigation, adaptation, system/sector, and SDGs. Positive links shown in WGII Figure SPM.4b and WGIII Figure SPM.8 are counted and aggregated to generate the percentage share of synergies, represented here by the blue proportion within the bars. Negative links shown in WGII Figure SPM.4b and WGIII Figure SPM.8 are counted and aggregated to generate the percentage share of trade-offs and is represented by orange proportion within the bars. ‘Both synergies and trade-offs’ shown in WGII Figure SPM.4b WGIII Figure SPM.8 are counted and aggregated to generate the percentage share of ‘both synergies and trade-off’, represented by the striped proportion within the bars. The ‘white’ proportion within the bar indicates limited evidence/ no evidence/ not assessed. Energy systems comprise all mitigation options listed in WGIII Figure SPM.8 and WGII Figure SPM.4b for adaptation. Urban and infrastructure comprises all mitigation options listed in WGIII Figure SPM.8 under Urban systems, under Buildings and under Transport and adaptation options listed in WGII Figure SPM.4b under Urban and infrastructure systems. Land system comprises mitigation options listed in WGIII Figure SPM.8 under AFOLU and adaptation options listed in WGII Figure SPM.4b under Land and ocean systems: forest-based adaptation, agroforestry, biodiversity management and ecosystem connectivity, improved cropland management, efficient livestock management, water use efficiency and water resource management. Ocean ecosystems comprises adaptation options listed in WGII Figure SPM.4b under Land and ocean systems: coastal defence and hardening, integrated coastal zone management and sustainable aquaculture and fisheries. Society, livelihood and economies comprises adaptation options listed in WGII Figure SPM.4b under Cross-sectoral; Industry comprises all those mitigation options listed in WGIII Figure SPM.8 under Industry. SDG 13 (Climate Action) is not listed because mitigation/ adaptation is being considered in terms of interaction with SDGs and not vice versa (SPM SR1.5 Figure SPM.4 caption). The bars denote the strength of the connection and do not consider the strength of the impact on the SDGs. The synergies and trade-offs differ depending on the context and the scale of implementation. Scale of implementation particularly matters when there is competition for scarce resources. For the sake of uniformity, we are not reporting the confidence levels because there is knowledge gap in adaptation option wise relation with SDGs and their confidence level which is evident from WGII fig SPM.4b. {WGII Figure SPM.4b; WGIII Figure SPM.8}Open figure Several mitigation and adaptation options can harness near-term synergies and reduce trade-offs to advance sustainable development in energy, urban and land systems (Figure 4.5)   (high confidence). Clean energy supply systems have multiple co-benefits, including improvements in air quality and health. Heat Health Action Plans that include early warning and response systems, approaches that mainstream health into food, livelihoods, social protection, water and sanitation benefit health and well-being. There are potential synergies between multiple Sustainable Development Goals and sustainable land use and urban planning with more green spaces, reduced air pollution, and demand-side mitigation including shifts to balanced, sustainable healthy diets. Electrification combined with low-GHG energy, and shifts to public transport can enhance health, employment, and can contribute to energy security and deliver equity. Conservation, protection and restoration of terrestrial, freshwater, coastal and ocean ecosystems, together with targeted management to adapt to unavoidable impacts of climate change can generate multiple additional benefits, such as agricultural productivity, food security, and biodiversity conservation. (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.1.1, WGII C.2.4, WGII SPM D.1, WGII Figure SPM.4, WGII Cross-Chapter Box HEALTH in Chapter 17, WGII Cross-Chapter Box FEASIB in Chapter 18; WGIII SPM C.4.2, WGIII SPM D.1.3, WGIII SPM D.2, WGIII Figure SPM.8; SRCCL SPM B.4.6}When implementing mitigation and adaptation together, and taking trade-offs into account, multiple co- benefits and synergies for human well-being as well as ecosystem and planetary health can be realised (high confidence). There is a strong link between sustainable development, vulnerability and climate risks. Social safety nets that support climate change adaptation have strong co-benefits with development goals such as education, poverty alleviation, gender inclusion and food security. Land restoration contributes to mitigation and adaptation with synergies via enhanced ecosystem services and with economically positive returns and co-benefits for poverty reduction and improved livelihoods. Trade-offs can be evaluated and minimised by giving emphasis to capacity building, finance, technology transfer, investments; governance, development, context specific gender-based and other social equity considerations with meaningful participation of Indigenous Peoples, local communities and vulnerable populations. (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.2.9, WGII SPM C.5.6, WGII SPM D.5.2, WGII Cross-Chapter Box on Gender in Chapter 18; WGIII SPM C.9.2, WGIII SPM D.1.2, WGIII SPM D.1.4, WGIII SPM D.2; SRCCL SPM D.2.2, SRCCL TS.4}Context relevant design and implementation requires considering people’s needs, biodiversity, and other sustainable development dimensions (very high confidence). Countries at all stages of economic development seek to improve the well-being of people, and their development priorities reflect different starting points and contexts. Different contexts include but are not limited to social, economic, environmental, cultural, or political circumstances, resource endowment, capabilities, international environment, and prior development. n regions with high dependency on fossil fuels for, among other things, revenue and employment generation, mitigating risks for sustainable development requires policies that promote economic and energy sector diversification and considerations of just transitions principles, processes and practices (high confidence). For individuals and households in low-lying coastal areas, in Small Islands, and smallholder farmers transitioning from incremental to transformational adaptation can help overcome soft adaptation limits (high confidence). Effective governance is needed to limit trade-offs of some mitigation options such as large scale afforestation and bioenergy options due to risks from their deployment for food systems, biodiversity, other ecosystem functions and services, and livelihoods (high confidence). Effective governance requires adequate institutional capacity at all levels (high confidence). {WGII SPM B.5.4, WGII SPM C.3.1, WGII SPM C.3.4; WGIII SPM D.1.3, WGIII SPM E.4.2; SR1.5 SPM C.3.4, SR1.5 SPM C.3.5, SR1.5 SPM Figure SPM.4, SR1.5 SPM D.4.3, SR1.5 SPM D.4.4}