This chapter contributes a fifth system transition in addition to the four which have already been introduced by SR1.5: the societal systems transition. While society and people also feature in the other systems transitions, the purpose of defining a fifth transition is to explicitly highlight the challenges associated with changes in behaviour, attitudes, values and consciousness required to achieve CRD. One caveat of considering transitions in societal systems is the limit to which the nature of change is known: transitions accomplish reconfigurations towards a relatively known destination. Historical and current differences between and within nations translate to a multitude of equally valid but diverse priorities for development, for example the understanding of development towards progress as linear has been challenged as being a Western concept by scholars of colonialisation (Sultana et al., 2019). Thus, societal transitions are understood as being intrinsically diverse for the purpose of achieving CRD.The four systems transitions identified in SR1.5 already include a component of societal change—for example, attitude change is part of public acceptance that facilitates shifts in energy including changing electricity to renewables (Chapter 4 SR1.5, Section 4.3.1.1) and developing nuclear power (Section 4.3.1.3), and behavioural change is a part of shifting irrigation practices to drive required land and ecosystems transitions (Section 4.3.2.1). Extracting societal transitions also allows for a detailed examination of other societal dimensions that facilitate systems transitions, for example justice issues relating to water and energy access and distribution, and land use. Societal transition, sometimes known as ‘societal transformation’, is an established concept in different literatures, as described below. Transformation and transition are terms often used as synonyms (Hölscher et al., 2018), although different schools of thought understand them as sub-components of each other, for example transition driving transformation, or transformation driving transition. For a more detailed discussion on the differences between transition and transformation represented in the literature, see Box 18.1.Societal transitions for the purpose of this report are understood as the collection of shifts in attitudes, values, consciousness and behaviour required to move towards CRD. This builds on the SR1.5 (IPCC, 2018a: 599) definition of societal (social) transformation: ‘A profound and often deliberate shift initiated by communities towards sustainability, facilitated by changes in individual and collective values and behaviours, and a fairer balance of political, cultural, and institutional power in society’. This includes accepting Indigenous knowledge and local knowledge (IKLK) as an equally valid form of knowledge as compared with Western, scientific knowledge (see Cross-Chapter Box INDIG) and recognition of the role of shifting gender norms to achieve climate resilience (see Cross-Chapter Box GENDER). Changes associated with societal transitions are not specific to defined systems (e.g., energy, industry, land/ecosystems or urban/infrastructure). Rather, these sectoral systems are embedded within broader societal systems, including for example political systems, economic systems, knowledge systems and cultural systems (Davelaar, 2021; Turnhout et al., 2021; Visseren-Hamakers et al., 2021). Changes that happen in these broader social systems can therefore prompt changes in all systems embedded within them, meaning that societal transition is key to transforming across a range of sectors and topics (Leventon et al., 2021). Furthermore, societal transition requires changes in individual behaviours, but also in the broader conditions that shape these behaviours. These broader conditions are largely related to questions of power, in enforcing dominant political economies and social-technological mindsets (Stoddard et al., 2021). This section also briefly describes the various trains of research on societal transitions and transformation.Because of the multiple sectors, interests and scales that are involved in societal transitions, understanding and creating evidence on transitions requires shifting across system boundaries and finding ways to transcend disciplinary silos. Relevant research includes work within the topic of transformation and transitions (Hölscher et al., 2018). Transformations literature can be split into multiple sub-concepts and requires engagement with multiple schools of thought (Feola, 2015; Feola et al., 2021). Much focus within transformations research is currently related to biodiversity conservation (Massarella et al., 2021), and transitions work tends towards a focus in urban areas (Loorbach et al., 2017). Though there is also work in both that is more broadly labelled as sustainability transformations or transitions (Luederitz et al., 2017). Furthermore, there is likely to be much relevant literature that does not explicitly label itself as transformations or transitions (Feola et al., 2021). For example, we could look to political science theories on policy change (Leventon et al., 2021) and historical perspectives on social change. Bridging these divides will require a deeper rethinking in the research community to undo power structures that marginalise diverse knowledge (Caniglia et al., 2021; Lahsen and Turnhout, 2021).There are a number of concepts proposed as pathways to creating societal transitions; usually centred around the idea of working with individuals and communities to change their mindsets as a way to change the way they manage their local environments or behave. Transformations work explores how values are pathways towards sustainability, for example by changing values, through making values explicit, through negotiation and by eliciting values (Horcea-Milcu et al., 2019). Human nature connections is a further concept that is identified as a way to shift values and behaviours across a range of disciplines (Ives et al., 2017). The role of learning and Indigenous knowledge is also explored (Lam et al., 2020). These three concepts have had particular salience in discussions around transformations for biodiversity conservation and restoration, related to the IPBES assessment on Values (Pascual et al., 2017; Peterson et al., 2018). They largely focus on the need to engage with people’s values, connections and knowledge to better manage the social–ecological system they are in.Focusing on bottom-up and community-led transformations, there is emphasis on the role of grassroots organisations in transformations. Community actions around specific locations or topics have parallels to the idea of transformative spaces. They are sites of innovative activity (Seyfang and Smith, 2007). Grassroots organisations can bridge the local and the political scales by politicising actors and creating new interactions between individuals and political processes (Novák, 2021). They are a collective approach to pushing for both individual and societal change (Sage et al., 2021).Despite a current lack of empirical evidence, there are numerous frameworks emerging for exploring societal transitions across levels. There is focus on pathways for sustainability transitions, which tends to look at projected, normative scenarios for the future, and explore or back-cast the institutional and societal changes that are required to get there (Westley et al., 2011; Sharpe et al., 2016). There is also work that looks at scaling up of smaller sustainability initiatives, through processes of scaling up, scaling out and scaling deep (Moore et al., 2015; Lam et al., 2020). In particular, systems thinking provides an organising framework for bringing together multiple disciplines and perspectives, to understand problem framings, and normative and design aspects of social systems and behaviours (Foster-Fishman et al., 2007). Within this, Meadows (1999) framework of leverage points for systems transformation has been operationalised within the sustainability transformations debate (Abson et al., 2017). Here, system properties relating to system paradigms and design are leverage points where interventions can create greatest system change; shallower leverage points relate to materials and processes. This framework is increasingly being used across a range of sustainability problems as boundary objects for cross-disciplinary, critical research (Fischer and Riechers, 2019; Leventon et al., 2021; Riechers et al., 2021).Analyses of societal transitions have had limited engagement with adaptation questions. The focus of the sub-field of sustainability transitions on a few industrialised nations, mostly in North America and Europe, limited the field’s development to assumptions born from the experiences in those areas. More recent studies have sought to understand sustainability transitions in other countries, especially emerging economies (Wieczorek, 2018; Köhler et al., 2019). In particular, China has received attention from scholars on sustainability transitions (Huang et al., 2018; Lo and Castán Broto, 2019; Castán Broto et al., 2020; Huang and Sun, 2020). As a result, some pressing issues related to societal transitions for adaptation have received limited attention compared with that paid to other system transitions. However, more recently, scholarship has begun examining transitions that have turned to nature and nature-based solutions. Adaptive transitions are an intermediary step towards sustainability transitions, whereby multiple actions at material and institutional levels are combined towards improving adaptation outcomes (Pant et al., 2015; Scarano, 2017).