Figure 10.23 sets out the feasibility of the core mitigation options using the six criteria created for the cross-sectoral analysis. This feasibility assessment outlines how the conclusions outlined in Section 10.8.1 fit into the broader criteria created for feasibility in the whole AR6 report and that emphasise the SDGs. Figure 10.23 highlights that there is  high confidence that demand reductions and mode shift can be feasible as the basis of a GHG emissions mitigation strategy for the transport sector. However, demand-side interventions work best when integrated with technology changes. The technologies that can support such changes have a range of potential limitations as well as opportunities. EVs have a reliance on renewable resources (wind, solar, and hydro) for power generation, which could pose constraints on geophysical resources, land use, and water use. Furthermore, expanding the deployment of EVs requires a rapid deployment of new power generation capacity and charging infrastructure. The overall feasibility of electric vehicles for land transport is likely high and their adoption is accelerating. HFCVs for land transport would also have constraints related to geophysical resource needs, land use, and water use. These constraints are likely higher than for EVs, since producing hydrogen with electricity reduces the overall efficiency of meeting travel demand. Furthermore, the infrastructure needed to produce, transport, and deliver hydrogen is under-developed and would require significant R&D and a rapid scale-up. Thus, the feasibility of HFCV is likely lower than for EVs. Biofuels could be used in all segments of the transport sector, but there may be some concerns about their feasibility. Specifically, there are concerns about land use, water use, impacts on water quality and eutrophication, and biodiversity impacts. Advanced biofuels could mitigate some concerns and the feasibility of using these fuels likely varies by world region. The feasibility assessment for alternative fuels for shipping and aviation suggests that hydrogen-based fuels like ammonia and synthetic fuels have the lowest technology readiness of all mitigation options considered in this chapter. Reliance on electrolytic hydrogen for the production of these fuels poses concerns about land and water use. Using ammonia for shipping could pose risks for air quality and toxic discharges to the environment. The DAC/BECCS infrastructure that would be needed to produce synthetic fuel does not yet exist. Thus, the feasibility suggests that the technologies for producing and using these hydrogen-based fuels for transport are in their infancy.Figure 10.23 | Summary of the extent to which different factors would enable or inhibit the deployment of mitigation options in transport. Blue bars indicate the extent to which the indicator enables the implementation of the option (E) and orange bars indicate the extent to which an indicator is a barrier (B) to the deployment of the option, relative to the maximum possible barriers and enablers assessed. An ‘X’ signifies the indicator is not applicable or does not affect the feasibility of the option, while a forward slash indicates that there is no or limited evidence whether the indicator affects the feasibility of the option. The shading indicates the level of confidence, with darker shading signifying higher levels of confidence. Appendix 10.3 provides an overview of the extent to which the feasibility of options may differ across context (e.g., region), time (e.g., 2030 versus 2050), and scale (e.g., small versus large), and includes a line of sight on which the assessment is based. The assessment method is explained in Annex II.11.Open figure 