This Sixth Assessment Report covers mitigation in five main parts (Figure 1.9), namely: introduction and frameworks; emission trends, scenarios and pathways; sectors; institutional dimensions including national and international policy, financial and technological mitigation drivers; and conclusions.Figure 1.9 | The structure of the AR6 mit igation report. Open figure Chapters 2 to 5 cover the big picture trends, drivers and projections at national and global levels. Chapter 2 analyses emission trends and drivers to date. Chapter 3 presents long-term global scenarios, including the projected economic and other characteristics of mitigation through to the balancing of sources and sinks through the second half of this century, and the implications for global temperature change and risks. Chapter 4 explores the shorter-term prospects including NDCs, and the possibilities for accelerating mitigation out to 2050 in the context of sustainable development at the national, regional and international scales. Chapter 5, a new chapter for IPCC Assessments, focuses upon the role of services and derived demand for energy and land use, and the social dimensions.Chapters 6 to 12 examine sectoral contributions and possibilities for mitigation. Chapter 6 summarises characteristics and trends in the energy sector, specifically supply, including the remarkable changes in the cost of some key technologies since AR5. Chapter 7 examines the roles of AFOLU, drawing upon and updating the recent Special Report, including the potential tensions between the multiple uses of land. Chapter 8 presents a holistic view of the trends and pressures of urban systems, as both a challenge and an opportunity for mitigation. Chapters 9 and 10 then examine two sectors which entwine with, but go well beyond, urban systems: buildings (Chapter 9) including construction materials and zero-carbon buildings; and transport (Chapter 10), including shipping and aviation and a wider look at mobility as a general service. Chapter 11 explores the contribution of industry, including supply chain developments, resource efficiency/circular economy, and the cross-system implications of decarbonisation for industrial systems. Finally, Chapter 12 takes a cross-sectoral perspective and explores cross-cutting issues like the interactions of biomass energy, food and land, and carbon dioxide removal.Four chapters then review thematic issues in implementation and governance of mitigation. Chapter 13 explores national and sub-national policies and institutions, bringing together lessons of policies examined in the sectoral chapters, as well as insights from service and demand-side perspectives (Chapter 5), along with governance approaches and capacity-building, and the role and relationships of sub-national actors. Chapter 14 then considers the roles and status of international cooperation, including the UNFCCC agreements and international institutions, sectoral agreements and multiple forms of international partnerships, and the ethics and governance challenges of solar radiation modification. Chapter 15 explores investment and finance, including current trends, the investment needs for deep decarbonisation, and the complementary roles of public and private finance. This includes climate-related investment opportunities and risks (e.g., ‘stranded assets’), linkages between finance and investments in adaptation and mitigation; and the impact of COVID-19. A new chapter on innovation (Chapter 16) looks at technology development, accelerated deployment and global diffusion as systemic issues that hold potential for transformative changes, and the challenges of managing such changes at multiple levels including the role of international cooperation.Finally, Chapter 17 considers accelerating the transition in the context of sustainable development, including practical pathways for joint responses to climate change and sustainable development challenges. This includes major regional perspectives, mitigation-adaptation interlinkages, and enabling conditions including the roles of technology, finance and cooperation for sustainable development.