Until 2016, the strategic goals of Finnish food policy were split between different programmes and ministries, resulting in fragmented national oversight of the Finnish food system. To enable policy coordination, a national food strategy was adopted in 2017 called Food2030 (Government of Finland 2017). Food2030 embodies a holistic food system approach and addresses multiple outcomes of the food system, including the competitiveness of the food supply chain and the development of local, organic and climate-friendly food production, as well as responsible and sustainable consumption.The specific policy mix covers a range of policy instruments to enable changes in agro-food supply, processing and societal norms (Kugelberg et al. 2021). The government provides targeted funding and knowledge support to drive technological innovations on climate solutions to reduce emissions from food and in the agriculture, forestry and land use sectors. In addition, the Finnish government applies administrative means, such as legislation, advice, guidance on public procurement and support schemes to diversify and increase organic food production to 20% of arable land, which in turn improve the opportunities for small-scale food production and steer public bodies to purchase local and organic food. The Finnish government applies educational and informative instruments to enable a shift to healthy and sustainable dietary behaviours. The policy objective is to reduce consumption of meat and replace it with other sources of protein, aligned with nutrition recommendations and avoiding food waste. The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, in collaboration with the Finnish Farmer’s unions and the Union of Swedish-speaking Farmers and Forest Owners in Finland, ran a two-year multi-media campaign in 2018 with key messages on the sustainability, traceability and safety of locally-produced food (Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 2021). A ’Food Facts’ website project (Luke 2021), funded by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry in collaboration with the Natural Resources Institute Finland and the Finnish Food Safety Authority, helps to raise knowledge about food, which could shape responsible individual food behaviour, for example choosing local and sustainable foods and reducing food waste.A critical enabler for developing a shared food system strategy across sectors and political party boundaries was the implementation of a one-year inclusive, deliberative and consensual stakeholder engagement process. A wide range of stakeholders could exert real influence during the vision-building process, resulting in strong agreement on key policy objectives, and subsequently an important leverage point to policy change (Kugelberg et al. 2021). Moreover, cross-sectoral coordination of Food2030 and the government’s wider climate action programmes are enabled by a number of institutional mechanisms and collaborative structures, for example the advisory board for the food chain, formally established during the agenda-setting stage of Food2030, inter-ministerial committees to guide and assess policy implementation, and Our Common Dining Table, a multi-stakeholder partnership that assembles 18 food system actors to engage in reflexive discussions about the Finnish food system.Box 12.2Critical barriers to strategy and policy formulation include a lack of attention to integrated impact assessments (Kugelberg et al. 2021), which blurs a transparent overview of potential trade-offs and hidden conflicts. There were few policy evaluations from independent organisations to inform policymaking, reducing the opportunities for more progressive policy approaches. Monitoring and food policy evaluation is very close to the ministry in charge, which hampers critical thinking about policy measures (Hildén et al. 2014). In addition, there is a lack of standardised indicators covering the whole food system, which hinders comprehensive oversight of progress towards a sustainable food system (Kanter et al. 2018a). Some of the problems related to monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) are typical for countries in the EU. To improve, MRV will probably require structural changes, such as efforts to build up institutional capacity and application of new technology, development of standardised indicators covering the whole food system, regulations on transparency and verification, and mechanisms to enable reflexive discussions between business, farmers, public, NGOs and the government (Meadowcroft and Steurer 2018; Kanter et al. 2020).