The AR5 was published in 2014. The Paris Agreement and the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) were adopted in 2015. An increasing number of countries have since announced ambitions to be carbon neutral by 2045–2060. The COVID-19 pandemic shocked the global economy in 2020 and motivated economic stimulus with demands for green recovery and concerns for economic security. All this has created a new context and a growing recognition that all industry, including the energy and emissions intensive industries, need to reach net zero GHG emissions. There is an ongoing mind shift around the opportunities to do so, with electrification and hydrogen emerging among key mitigation options as a result of renewable electricity costs falling rapidly. On the demand side there has been renewed attention to end-use demand, material efficiency, and more and better-quality recycling measures. This chapter takes its starting point in this new context and emphasises the need for deploying innovative processes and practices in order to limit the global warming to 1.5°C or 2°C (IPCC 2018a).The industrial sector includes ores and minerals mining, manufacturing, construction and waste management. It is the largest source of global GHG and CO2 emissions, which include direct and indirect fuel-combustion-related emissions, emissions from industrial processes and products use, as well as from waste. This chapter is focused on heavy industry – the high temperature heat and process emissions intensive basic materials industries that account for 65% of industrial GHG and over 70% of industrial CO2 emissions (waste excluded), where deployment of near‐zero emissions technologies can be more challenging due to capital intensity and equipment lifetimes compared with other manufacturing industries. The transition of heavy industries to zero emissions requires supplementing the traditional toolkit of energy and process efficiency, fuel switching, electrification, and decarbonisation of power with material end-use demand management and efficiency, circular economy, fossil-free feedstocks, carbon capture and utilisation (CCU), and carbon capture and storage (CCS). Energy efficiency was extensively treated in AR5 and remains a key mitigation option. This chapter is focused mainly on new options and developments since AR5, highlighting measures along the whole value chains that are required to approach zero emissions in primary materials production.