The majority of the Asian region is experiencing water stress in terms of both quantity and quality, due to poor management systems and governance. This has dire consequences for the national GDP as the majority of the population belongs to agrarian communities and their water-dependent agriculture system. Despite a substantial investment and progress in research and development, and capacity building in the recent past, the majority of developing countries in Asia are struggling to manage both water resources and agriculture sectors heavily dependent  on water resources, in response to rapid global changes. Considering the frequent extreme weather conditions, progress in management tasks is even more consequential; hence, critically important for these countries, to achieve better CCA, are advanced science and technology viz. smart agriculture, robust EWS using downscaled meteorological information, a participatory approach, IWRM and so forth.Having scientific knowledge relevant at the local scale through placed knowledge is important to identify climate-change risk and vulnerability. Moreover, once integrated with socioeconomic attributes, it can be useful for natural resource management, agriculture and so forth (Leith and Vanclay, 2017). Role of big data and data mining is undeniably very huge to get reliable climatic information and hence for designing appropriate adaptation measures for natural resource measurement. For example, use of big data in terms of EWS and real-time observation data provides more accurate information on hydro-meteorological extreme weather conditions or hazards like drought and flood, and will help farmers and local governments to improve their perception and hence preparedness for better adaptation (Hou et al., 2017; Ong and G.L.B.L., 2017). Using big data, different adaptation measures, such as new cultivar breeding, cropping-region adjustment, irrigation-pattern change, crop rotation and cropping-practice optimisation, are being designed in the agriculture sector, and these practices have greatly increased crop yield, leading to higher resource-use efficiency as well as greatly increased soil organic carbon content with reduced GHG emissions. It results in a win–win situation in terms of enhancing food security and mitigating climate warming (Deng et al., 2017). However, usability and application of this technology are still not common, especially in data-scarce regions. Integrated numerical simulations are efficient tools for estimating the current status and predicting the risk and efficiency of the adaptive capabilities of different countermeasures for sustainable natural resource management such as with water (Kumar, 2019). Similarly, the agent-based model is commonly used to estimate risk of food-borne diseases due to climate change, using tunable parameters such as hygiene level, the microorganism’s growth rate and the number of consumers, and hence it has the potential to be a useful tool for optimising decision making and urban planning strategies related to health and climate change (Gay Garcia et al., 2017). The integrated assessment model under the shared-socioeconomic pathway (SSP) framework is effectively used to estimate future energy development and possible mitigation strategies to reduce GHG emissions related to the energy sector (Bauer et al., 2017). Sound understanding of different drivers, pressures and stress factors, such as abnormal temperature, rainfall, insect pests or pathogens and their interaction pattern with the genetic makeup of crops, is the key to produce high-yielding varieties of wheat with better nutritional quality and resistance to major diseases (Goel et al., 2017). Another critical point to address this water security is inclusive, polycentric and adaptive governance. Polycentric governance is a means by which water management plans and policies should be framed and agreed by all relevant stakeholders. For adaptive governance, more emphasis will be on finding the best pathways to make robust water management plans amid rapid global changes. The benefit of such plans should reach the end users in terms of providing clean water, protection from hydrological hazards and maintaining the health of the ecosystem. In addition, there is urgent need for co-management, which includes the cycle of co-design, co-implementation and co-delivery throughout the whole water cycle. The best suitable example is using the circulating and ecological sphere (CES) approach. The CES is a concept that complements and supports regional resources by building broader networks, which are composed of natural connections (connections among forests; city and countryside; groundwater, rivers and the sea) and economic connections (human resources, funds and others), thus complementing each other and generating synergy (Mavrodieva and Shaw, 2020). Another suitable example for managing water resources is the participatory watershed land-use management (PWLM) approach. The PWLM is another very innovative and successful approach for more robust water resource management as explained by Kumar et al. (2020). It helps to make land-use and CCA policies more effective at the local scale. This is an integrative method using both participating tactics and computer-simulation modelling for water resource management at the regional scale.