As analytical concepts, mitigation and adaptation have helped, over the years, to structure thinking and action around climate change. However, since AR5 there has been a growing debate about the adequacy of a neat separation between adaptation and mitigation (Castán Broto, 2017).The delivery of climate change action has revealed numerous co-benefits between adaptation and mitigation, around diverse areas such as implementing NBS and delivering health and development benefits (Ürge-Vorsatz  et al., 2014; Suckall, Stringer and Tompkins, 2015; Puppim de Oliveira and Doll, 2016; Spencer  et al., 2017). There has been a strong interest in delivering development benefits alongside climate mitigation, thus benefiting the overall infrastructure base (Suckall, Stringer and Tompkins, 2015). Some of these co-benefits have also emerged in experiences of urban planning, pointing toward the dilemma of separating adaptation and mitigation in a context in which integration, rather than an analytical differentiation, was seen as being required to transcend work in silos (Aylett, 2015). Because urban planning needs to carefully consider long time scales, the neat separation between mitigation and adaptation runs counter to integrated forms of planning that can consider scales (time and space) carefully and that are aimed to deliver the sustainable city as a whole (Solecki  et al., 2015; Grafakos  et al., 2020).For example, the ideas of climate resilient development and climate compatible development help planners to consider the simultaneous wins that emerge between adaptation, mitigation and development, requiring institutional building and partnerships to deliver triple win solutions (Stringer  et al., 2014; Seo, Jaber and Srinivasan, 2017; Mitchell and Maxwell, 2010). While the evidence base for the actual possibility of achieving such triple wins remains scarce (Tompkins  et al., 2013; Sharifi, 2020), emerging examples show important developments. For example, establishing safe and convenient walking and cycling infrastructure can lead to improvements in population health, thereby highlighting the close interaction between urban land use, infrastructure and population health (Schuster  et al., 2017), while clean cooking has the potential to deliver positive health outcomes alongside improvements in air quality and emissions reductions and through reducing pressure on woodland as a fuel source for expanding urban populations (Msoffe, 2017). Furthermore, active transport infrastructure reduces air pollution and related health risks, and helps to mitigate further climate change (Schuster  et al., 2017). These are supported by city networks such as the C40 Clean Air Cities Declaration and the Clean Air Coalition that complements WHO guidelines and standards, for example through the Breathe Life Campaign. In conclusion, in both urban environments and infrastructural sectors, triple wins are only realisable through broader perspectives that link climate compatible development to institutional change or the achievements of wider welfare objectives such as those enshrined in the United Nations 2030 Agenda of Development (Castán Broto  et al., 2015; England  et al., 2018) (medium evidence, high agreement ).The aspiration to deliver climate change action within a broader agenda of transformative change, introduced in the SREX report, received renewed attention after the publication of IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C, which argues for a focus on urban transformations and highlighted that informal settlements were vital for understanding the delivery of these transformations. Deep decarbonisation has emerged as a new idea that regards the development of low or zero carbon pathways as a condition for good adaptation in the long term. Decarbonisation becomes urgent in the face of growing impacts attributable to climate change (Ribera  et al., 2015; Bataille  et al., 2016; Wesseling  et al., 2017). Urbanisation opens opportunities for deep mitigation in low-impact developments, and hence, it is imperative to understand the implications of those opportunities for climate action (Mulugetta and Broto, 2018). These gains are not limited to urban areas. The reliance on connected urban–rural systems for water, food and fuel has led to city government and urban-based businesses supporting landscape adaptations in rural hinterlands with strong potential for mitigation and rural development co-benefits. Water Funds bring downstream urban public and private finance to support upstream rural residents to make land use and agricultural management decisions to avoid damaging runoff, soil erosion and downstream sedimentation with reduction in water quality and increased flood risk. There are more than 30 Water Funds in Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa. These operate at landscape scale; the Upper Tana-Nairobi Water Fund, Kenya (Vogl  et al., 2017), planned for a USD 10 million investment in Water Fund-led conservation interventions, with a projected return of USD 21.5 million in economic benefits over a 30-year timeframe (Apse and Bryant, 2015). However, these investments do not occur where communities lack funding or the institutions to direct funding from downstream beneficiaries to upstream residents (Brauman  et al., 2019).