Regional changes in aridity – broadly defined as a deficit of moisture – are expected to occur in response to anthropogenic forcings as a consequence of shifting precipitation patterns, warmer temperatures, changes in cloudiness (affecting solar radiation), declining snowpack, changes in winds and humidity, and vegetation cover (Figure 8.6). Evapotranspiration (see Annex VII: Glossary) is a key component of aridity, and is composed of two main processes: evaporation from soil, water and vegetation surfaces; and transpiration, the exchange of moisture between plants and atmosphere through plant stomata. On a global level, warmer temperatures increase evaporative demand in the atmosphere, and thus (assuming sufficient soil moisture is available) increase moisture loss from evapotranspiration (high confidence) (Dai et al., 2018; Vicente-Serrano et al., 2020). On a regional level, aridity is further modulated by seasonal rainfall patterns, runoff, water storage, and interactions with vegetation.Figure 8.6 | Climatic drivers of drought, effects on water availability, and impacts. Plus and minus signs denote the direction of change that drivers have on factors such as snowpack, evapotranspiration, soil moisture, and water storage. The three main types of drought are listed, along with some possible environmental and socio-economic impacts of drought (bottom). Open figureVegetation is a crucial interface between subsurface water storage (in soil moisture and groundwater) and the atmosphere. Plants alter evapotranspiration and the surface energy balance, and thus can have a large influence on regional aridity (Lemordant et al., 2018). SRCCL concluded there is  high confidence that higher atmospheric CO2 increases the ratio of plant CO2 uptake to water loss (water-use efficiency; WUE) through the combined enhancement of photosynthesis and stomatal regulation (Section 5.4.1; DeKauwe et al. , 2013; C.D. Jones et al. , 2013; Deryng et al. , 2016; Swann et al. , 2016; Cheng et al. , 2017; Knauer et al. , 2017; Peters et al. , 2018; Guerrieri et al. , 2019). Modelling studies suggest that increasing WUE can partly counteract water losses from increased evaporative demand in a warmer atmosphere, potentially mitigating aridification (Milly and Dunne, 2016; Bonfils et al. , 2017; Cook et al. , 2018; Y. Yang et al. , 2018). However, observational studies suggest that this effect may be counter-balanced by the increase in plant growth in response to elevated CO2, which results in increased water consumption (De Kauwe et al. , 2013; Donohue et al. , 2013; Ukkola et al. , 2016b; Yang et al. , 2016; Guerrieri et al. , 2019; Mankin et al. , 2019; A. Singh et al. , 2020). In semi-arid regions, increased plant water consumption can reduce streamflow and exacerbate aridification (Ukkola et al. , 2016b; Mankin et al. , 2019; A. Singh et al. , 2020). Thus, there is low confidence that increased WUE in plants can counterbalance increased evaporative demand (Cross-Chapter Box 5.1).A drought is a period of abnormally dry weather that persists for long enough to cause a serious hydrological imbalance (Glossary; Wilhite and Glantz, 1985; Wilhite, 2000; Cook et al., 2018). Most droughts begin as persistent precipitation deficits (‘meteorological drought’) that propagate over time into deficits in soil moisture, streamflow, and water storage (Figure 8.6), leading to a reduction in water supply (‘hydrological drought’). Increased atmospheric evaporative demand increases plant water stress, leading to ‘agricultural and ecological drought’ (Williams et al. , 2013; C.D. Allen et al. , 2015; Anderegg et al. , 2016; McDowell et al. , 2016; Grossiord et al. , 2020). Evaporative demand affects plants in two ways. It increases evapotranspiration, depleting soil moisture and stressing plants through lack of water (Teuling et al., 2013; Sperry et al., 2016), and also directly affects plant physiology, causing a decline in hydraulic conductance and carbon metabolism, leading to mortality (Figure 8.6; Breshears et al., 2013; Hartmann, 2015; McDowell and Allen, 2015; Fontes et al., 2018). While droughts are traditionally viewed as ‘slow moving’ disasters that typically take months or years to develop, rapidly evolving and often unpredictable flash droughtscan also occur (Otkin et al., 2016, 2018). Flash droughtscan develop within a few weeks, causing substantial disruption to agriculture and water resources (Pendergrass et al., 2020). Conversely, droughts that persist for a long time (usually a decade or more) are called megadroughts. Droughts span a large range of spatial and temporal scales, arise through a variety of climate system dynamics (e.g., internal atmospheric variability, ocean teleconnections), and can be amplified or alleviated by a variety of physical and biological processes. As such, droughts occupy a unique space within the framework of extreme climate and weather events, possessing no singular definition.While the role of precipitation in droughts is obvious, other climatic drivers are also important, such as temperature, radiation, wind, and humidity (Figure 8.6). These factors have a strong influence on atmospheric evaporative demand, which affects evapotranspiration and soil moisture (Figure 8.6). In snow-dominated regions, high temperatures increase the fraction of precipitation falling as rain instead of snow and advance the timing of spring snowmelt (high confidence) (Vincent  et al. , 2015; Mote et al. , 2016, 2018; Berg and Hall, 2017; Solander et al. , 2018). This can result in lower than normal snowpack levels (a ‘snow drought’), and thus reduced streamflow, even if total precipitation is at or above normal for the cold season (Harpold et al., 2017). Plants also affect the severity of droughts by modulating evapotranspiration (Figure 8.6). As discussed above, the effect of elevated CO2 on plants has the potential to both increase and reduce water loss through evapotranspiration via enhanced WUE and plant growth, respectively (Figure 8.6), but there is low confidence in whether one process dominates over another at the global scale.Drought severity also depends on human activities and decision-making (AghaKouchak et al. , 2015; Van Loon et al. , 2016; Pendergrass et al. , 2020). Societies have developed a variety of strategies to manipulate the water cycle to increase resiliency in the face of water scarcity, including irrigation, creation of artificial reservoirs, and groundwater pumping. While potentially buffering water resource capacity, in some cases these interventions may unexpectedly increase vulnerability (medium confidence). For example, while increased irrigation efficiency may ensure more water is available to crops, the corresponding reduction in runoff and subsurface recharge may exacerbate hydrologic drought (Grafton et al., 2018). Furthermore, while building dams and increasing surface reservoir capacity can boost water resources, they may actually increase drought vulnerability if demands rise to take advantage of the increased supply or if over-reliance on these surface reservoirs is encouraged (Di Baldassarre et al., 2018). Interactions between adaptation, vulnerability, and drought impacts are discussed further in WGII (Chapters 2 and 4).In summary, there is  high confidence that a warming climate drives an increase in atmospheric evaporative demand, decreasing available soil moisture. There is  high confidence that higher atmospheric CO2 increases plant water-use efficiency, but low confidence that this physiological effect can counterbalance water losses. Since drought can be defined in a number of ways, there are potentially different responses under a warming climate depending on drought type. Beyond a lack of precipitation, changes in evapotranspiration are critical components of drought, because these can lead to soil moisture declines (high confidence). Under very dry soil conditions, evapotranspiration becomes restricted and plants experience water stress in response to increased atmospheric demand (medium confidence). Human activities and decision-making have a critical impact on drought severity (high confidence).