Figure 6.2 presents the Chapter 6 roadmap.Figure 6.2 | Visual guide to Chapter 6.  See Section 6.1.3 for additional description of the chapter. Open figureSpecific aspects of SLCFs can also be found in other chapters of this report: the evolution of ozone, HFCs and aerosols, as well as the long-term evolution of methane, dust and volcanic aerosols are discussed in Chapter 2; near-term climate projections and SLCFs are discussed in Chapter 4; the global budget of methane is addressed in Chapter 5; aerosol–cloud and aerosol–precipitation interactions are treated in Chapters 7 and 8, respectively; the global radiative forcing of SLCFs is assessed in Chapter 7; some aspects of downscaling methodology in climate modelling concerning SLCFs are discussed in Chapter 10. The WGII report assesses how climate change affects air pollution and its impacts on human health and the WGIII report assesses the role of SLCFs in abatement strategies and their cost-effectiveness, the implications of mitigation efforts on air pollution as well as the articulation between air pollution policies and GHG mitigation.This chapter discusses air quality from a global point of view with a focus on surface ozone and particulate matter concentrations. Local and indoor air pollution, as well as the effect of air pollution on health, are beyond the scope of this chapter. This Assessment is mainly based on results and studies relying on global models or observation datasets operated through global networks or from satellites. Global chemistry-climate modelsenable the quantification of changes in background concentrations, such as changes in surface ozone due to large-scale changes in climate or methane, by considering comprehensively the physiochemical processes (Box 6.1). In addition, climate effects are often non-linear responses to concentrations which already respond non-linearly to emissions, with per-mass unit effects often larger in pristine than in polluted regions, justifying the relevance of global models. However, specific aspects of urban air quality cannot be captured by global models and require high-resolution models that reproduce the temporal and spatial variability of emissions and abundances necessary to precisely account for the non-linearity of the chemistry and the sensitivity of local air pollution to its drivers. Consequently, the sectoral analysis in Section 6.6 and the mitigation effects in Section 6.7 cannot be directly applied for local air-quality planning.Due to their short lifetimes, SLCF trends and effects are strongly related to the localization and evolution of the emissions sources. To better link the drivers of emissions evolution and SLCFs, Chapter 6 makes use of regions defined by the WGIII in most of the analysis. An exception is made for the effect of SLCFs on the climate, for which analysis relies on WGI Atlas regions.