While the circular economy concept first emerged in the context of waste avoidance, resource depletion, closed-loop recycling, etc., it has now evolved as a tool for a broader systemic national policy due to its potential wider benefits (Geng et al. 2013). It represents new circular business models that encourage design for reuse and to improve material recovery and recycling, and so represents a departure from the traditional linear production and consumption systems (with landfilling at the end), with a wide range of potential co-benefits to a wide range of SDGs (Guo et al. 2016; Genovese et al. 2017; Schroeder et al. 2019; UNSD 2020).Genovese et al. (2017) articulates the advantages from an environmental and responsible consumption and production point of view (SDG 12). Many studies have outlined new business models based on the circular economy that foster sustainable economic growth and the generation of new jobs (SDG 8) (Antikainen and Valkokari 2016), as well as global competitiveness and innovation in business and the industrial sector (Pieroni et al. 2019), such as its potential synergies with industry 4.0 (Garcia-Muiña et al. 2018).Following a review of the literature, Schroeder et al. (2019) identified linkages between circular economy practices and SDGs based on a relationship scoring system, and highlighted that such SDGs as SDG 6 (clean water and sanitation), SDG 7 (affordable and clean energy), SDG 8 (decent work and economic growth), SDG 12 (responsible consumption and production), and SDG 15 (life on land) all strongly benefit from circular economy practices. With the potential to impact on all stages of the value chain (micro, meso and macro level of the economy), circular economy has also been identified as a key industrial strategy to managing waste across sectors.Chatziaras et al. (2016) highlights the co-benefit to SDG 7 (affordable and clean energy) resulting from waste-derived fuel for the cement industry. Through the management of industrial waste using circular economy practices, studies such as Geng et al. (2012) and Bonato and Orsini (2017) have pointed out co-benefits to SDGs beyond clear environmental and economic benefits, highlighting how it also benefits SDG 3 and 11 through improved social relations between industrial sectors and local societies, and improved public environmental awareness and public health levels.