This regional chapter on climate-change impacts, vulnerabilities and adaptations in Europe examines the impacts on the sectors, regions and vulnerable populations of Europe, assesses the causes of vulnerability and analyses ways to adapt, thereby considering socioeconomic developments, land-use change and other non-climatic drivers. Compared with AR5 and in the context of the Paris Agreement (2015), we place emphasis on the planned and implemented solutions, assess their feasibility and effectiveness, and consider the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) and shared socioeconomic pathways (SSPs). Global warming level (GWL) refers to global climate-change emissions relative to pre-industrial levels, expressed as global surface air temperature (Section 1.6.2; Chen et al., 2021).The chapter generally follows the overall structure of AR6 WGII. We first present our point of departure (the present section) followed by the key sectors, starting with water, as water is interconnected and of fundamental importance to subsequent sections (Sections 13.2–13.8). For each section, we assess the observed impacts and projected risks, solution space and adaptation options, and knowledge gaps. The solution space is defined as the space within which opportunities and constraints determine why, how, when and who adapts to climate risks (Haasnoot et al., 2020a). Section 13.9 discusses impacts and adaptation beyond Europe, followed by the key risks for Europe (Section 13.10). The chapter ends with an assessment of the adaptation solution space, CRD pathways and SDGs (13.11), although recognising that scientific literature on these aspects is only slowly beginning to emerge.With the rapidly growing body of scientific literature since WGII AR5 (Callaghan et al., 2020), our assessment prioritises systematic reviews, meta-analyses, and synthesis papers and reports. Feasibility and effectiveness assessments use revised methods developed for the Special Report of Global warming of 1.5°C (de Coninck et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2020). Protocols, as well as supporting material for figures and tables, can be found in the Supplementary Material.The geographical scope and subdivision of European land, coastal and ocean regions is largely the same as in WGII AR5 Chapter 23 (Kovats et al., 2014): Southern Europe (SEU), Western Central Europe (WCE), Eastern Europe (EEU) and Northern Europe (NEU). Note that WGI assesses a larger region for the Mediterranean (MED) which includes North Africa and the Middle East compared with the assessment in this chapter (SEU). The European part of the Arctic region is not systematically assessed here, as it is extensively captured in Cross-Chapter Paper 6. Information relevant to Europe is also synthesised in the CCPs (Cross-Chapter Papers), including European biodiversity hotspots (Cross-Chapter Paper 1), coastal cities and settlements (Cross-Chapter Paper 2), Mediterranean regions (Cross-Chapter Paper 4) and mountains (Cross-Chapter Paper 5). European seas are broadly divided by latitude into (i) European Arctic waters (NEUS), (ii) European temperate seas (TEUS) and (iii) southern seas with the Mediterranean and the Black Sea (SEUS) (Figure 13.1).Figure 13.1 | Geographical subdivision of land (a,b,c,d) and ocean (i,ii,iii) regions of Europe. The overlay represents the WGI AR6 (IPCC, 2021) subdivisions for climate-change projections of land, while the colour coding indicates the European countries (or, in case of the Russian Federation, the European part of the country, EEU, used for this chapter). Note that in the WGI AR6 report, MED includes both Southern Europe and Northern Africa, while this chapter includes only the northern (European) part of the MED region. To distinguish between the two the region is called SEU here.Open figure 