RFCs reflect risks aggregated globally that together inform the interpretation of DAI with the climate system. The five RFC categories are maintained as previously defined for consistency with earlier assessments. Compared with the synthesis of risk across RKRs in Section 16.5, we note that the RKRs and RFCs are complementary methods that aggregate individual risks into different but interconnected categories (Figure 16.13).Figure 16.13 | Interconnections between the key risks, representative key risks and Reasons for Concern. Open figure We draw important distinctions between RFC and RKR. First, RFCs assess risks that might be of global concern, while RKRs also include risks that may be of concern only locally or for specific population groups (Figure 16.13). RFCs focus on the full range of increasing risk, and locate transitions between four categories of risk: undetectable, moderate, high, and very high. RKRs focus on severe risks, and attempt to elaborate when/where severe impacts may occur. RKR assessments focus on the conditions under which some risks would become severe over the course of this century, while RFCs evaluate changes in risk levels against gradual increase in temperature levels. The RKR analysis used specific definitions of severity including quantified thresholds where possible, and this is distinct from the approach based on the combined elements of risk used in the RFC expert elicitation process. Severity as defined in the RKRs is associated with high or very high risk levels but does not align precisely with either of those categories, and a further difference arises from a more explicit emphasis on irreversibility and adaptation limits in the very high risk category in the RFCs. Thus, RKR and RFC neither map directly to one another in terms of content, nor in terms of the response metric.The treatment of vulnerability and adaptation is different in the RKR and RFC assessments. The RKR assessment considered specifically three alternative levels of vulnerability, whereas the RFC process did not explicitly differentiate risk by level of vulnerability. Therefore, the global warming levels at which the various RKR assessments identify risk of severe impacts are not directly comparable to risk transitions identified in the RFC assessments. In addition, RKRs consider implications of low versus high adaptation in order to illustrate the potential role of ambitious adaptation efforts to limit risk severity; RFCs consider risks in a no/low adaptation scenario only, although there is some discussion of the potential role of adaptation in assessing the transition to very high risk. Last, both RKRs and RFCs focus on the 21st century scale, though recognising risk will continue to increase after 2100, but treat this timing issue differently: RKRs assess severe risks over the course of this century and distinguish risks that are already severe, that will become severe by the mid-century, or that will become severe by the end of the century; while RFCs assess risk level irrespective of their timing, but according to different temperature levels.Many of the elements of risk which contribute to RKRs also contribute to risk within one or more RFCs. In turn, elements of risk within some RFCs, such as extreme weather and changes in the Earth system contribute to risk within one or more RKR. Hence, RFCs may incorporate elements of many different RKRs, and vice versa. There are therefore common elements between some particular RKRs and RFCs: for example, risks to terrestrial and ocean ecosystems (RKR-B) contribute strongly to RFC1 (Unique and Threatened Systems) and RFC4 (Global Aggregate Impacts), while RFC2 (extreme weather events) has implications for all RKRs, including direct linkages with critical physical infrastructure, networks and services (RKR-C). Furthermore, risks emerging from the interaction of RKRs also contribute to the RFCs, but are only qualitatively described in Section 16.5.4. For example, the effects of risks to terrestrial and ocean ecosystems (RKR-A) affect living standards and equity (RKR-C), as does the associated decline in ecosystem services which then impacts livelihoods (RKR-D).