Technological advances have enhanced the capabilities of Asian countries to monitor and prepare for climate-related hazards. Remote sensing technologies and GIS are widely used for DRR (Kato et al., 2017), for example, to assess and mitigate risks of an area to potential climate-related disasters (Wu et al., 2018b). The potential impacts of different types of hazards can be visualised using interactive maps (Lee, 2017), which help local communities to understand risks and find appropriate evacuation areas (Cadiz, 2018). These maps provide a situational overview and instant risk assessment (Yang et al., 2012b). As an emerging technology, artificial intelligence (AI) can identify conditioning factors of a landslide disaster (Hong et al., 2019b). Mobile virtual reality is used for disaster mitigation training through a three-dimensional visualisation of a past disaster (Ghosh et al., 2018).A community-based DRR system provides risk investigation, training and information analysis (Liu et al., 2016b). Sharing information enhances establishment of such a system and contributes to disaster prevention (Nakamura et al., 2017). One example is an online mapping tool, which has been developed by volunteers (Sakurai and Thapa, 2017). Social media enables the population to access real-time information on a disaster (Ghosh et al., 2018), raises situation awareness (Yin et al., 2012) and empowers communities towards appropriate emergency actions (Leong et al., 2015). Among the various forms of social media, Twitter is widely used as a social sensor to detect what is happening in a disaster event (Sakaki et al., 2013). Accuracy of information on Twitter has been proved in collecting local details about floods (Shi et al., 2019b); however, it has been noticed that Twitter generates rumours as well (Ogasahara et al., 2019). Artificial intelligence is expected to reduce human error when they operate a decision-making system (Lin et al., 2018). Since technologies supporting DRR completely depend on electricity, the loss of power supply and communication constrains the recovery work in disaster-affected areas (Sakurai et al., 2014).