The Kaya identity offers a useful tool of decomposing emission sources and their drivers, as well as of weighing the mitigation options. The one presented below (Equation 11.1) builds on the previous assessments (IPCC 2014, 2018b; Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2018), and reflect a material stock-driven services-oriented vision to better highlight the growing importance of industrial processes (dominated in emissions  increments in 2010–2019), product use and waste in driving emissions. Services delivery (nutrition, shelter, mobility, education, etc.; see Chapter 5 for more detail) not only requires energy and material flows (fuels, food, feed, fertilisers, packaging, etc.), but also material stocks (buildings, roads, vehicles, machinery, etc.), the mass of which has already exceeded 1000 Gt (Krausmann et al. 2018). As material efficiency appears to be an important mitigation option, material intensity or productivity (material extraction or consumption versus GDP (Oberle et al. 2019; Hertwich et al. 2020)) is reflected in the identity with two dimensions: as material stock intensity of GDP (tonnes per dollar) and material intensity of building and operating accumulated in-use stock. 1 For sub-global analysis the ratio of domestically used materials to total material production becomes important to reflect outsourced materials production and distinguish between territorial and consumption-based emissions. The identity for industry differs significantly from that for sectors with where combustion emissions dominate (Lamb et al. 2021).Recent progress in data availability that allows the integration of major emission sources along with socio-economic metabolism, material flows and stock analysis enriches the identity for industry from a perspective of possible policy interventions (Bashmakov 2021):Equation 11.1 Table 1 | Variables, Factors, Policies and DriversVariablesFactorsPolicies and driversPOPPopulationDemographic policiesDemand decarbonisationGDP/POPServices (expressed via GDP– final consumption and investments needed to maintain and expand stock) per capitaSufficiency and demand management (reduction)MStock/GDPMaterial stock (MStock – accumulated in-use stocks of materials embodied in manufactured fixed capital) intensity of GDPMaterial stock efficiency improvement(MPR+MSE)/MStockMaterial inputs (both virgin (primary materials extraction, MPR) and recycled (secondary materials use, MSE)) per unit of in-use material stockMaterial efficiency, substitution and circular economyDmShare of allocated emissions – consumption vs production emissions accounting (valid only for sub-global levels)*Trade policies including carbon leakage issues (localisation versus globalisation)CBAME/(MPR+MSE)Sum of energy use for basic material production (Em), processing and other operational industrial energy use (Eoind) per unit of material inputsEnergy efficiency of basic materials production and other industrial processesProduction decarbonisation(GHGed+GHGeind)/EDirect (GHGed) and indirect (GHGeind) combustion-related industrial emissions per unit of energyElectrification, fuel switching, and energy decarbonisation (hydrogen, CCUS-fuels)GHGoth/(MPR+MSE)Emissions from industrial processes and product use, waste, F-gases, indirect nitrogen emissions per unit of produced materialsFeedstock decarbonisation (hydrogen), CCUS-industrial processes, waste and F-gases management*Dm=1, when territorial emission is considered, and Dm equals the ratio of domestically used materials to total material production for the consumption-based emission accounting). CBAM – carbon border adjustment mechanism.Factors in Equation 11.1 are interconnected by either positive or negative feedbacks: scrap-based production or light-weighing improves operational energy efficiency, while growing application of carbon capture, use and storage (CCUS) brings it down and increases material demands (Hertwich et al. 2019; IEA 2020a, 2021a). There are different ways to disaggregate Equation 11.1: by industrial subsectors (Bashmakov 2021); by reservoirs of material stock (buildings, infrastructure, vehicles, machinery and appliances, packaging, etc.); by regions and countries (where carbon leakage becomes relevant); by products and production chains (material extraction, production of basic materials, basic materials processing, production of final industrial products); by traditional and low carbon technologies used; and by stages of products’ lives including recycling.An industrial transition to net zero emissions is possible when the three last multipliers in Equation 11.1 (in square parentheses) are approaching zero. Contributions from different drivers (energy efficiency, low carbon electricity and heat, material efficiency, switching to low carbon feedstock and CCUS) to this evolution vary with time. Energy efficiency dominates in the short- and medium term and potentially long term (in the range of 10–40% by 2050) (IPCC 2018a; Crijns-Graus et al. 2020; IEA 2020a), but for deep decarbonisation trajectories, contributions from the other drivers steadily grow, as the share of non-energy sources in industrial emissions rises and new technologies to address mitigation from these sources mature (Material Economics 2019; CEMBUREAU 2020; BP 2020; Hertwich et al. 2020, 2019; IEA 2021a, 2020a; Saygin and Gielen 2021) (Figure 11.1).Figure 11.1 | Stylised composition and contributions from different drivers to the transition of industry to net zero emissions. Open figure 