This section examines the mutual reinforcement of climate change impacts and structural inequalities. There is robust evidence that negative impacts and harm posed by climate change are also a result of social and political processes and existing structural inequalities (Sealey-Huggins, 2018). Climate change encompasses unevenly distributed impacts on women, youth, elderly, Indigenous Peoples, communities of colour, urban poor and socially excluded groups, exacerbated by unequal distribution of resources and poor access for some (Rufat et al., 2015; McNeeley, 2017; Sealey-Huggins, 2018). Structurally disadvantaged people, who are subject to social, economic and political inequalities resulting historically from discrimination, marginality or disenfranchisement because of gender, age, ethnicity, class, language, ability and/or sexual orientation, are disproportionately vulnerable to the negative impacts of climate change hazards (Kaijser and Kronsell, 2014; Otto et al., 2016). High levels of vulnerability at national scale (see Section 8.3) are often linked to complex histories, including long-term economic dependencies established and reinforced in the context of colonisation.Links between climate change, structural racism and development are less well established as an element of disproportionate impacts of climate change (Sealey-Huggins, 2018). Discrimination is not restricted to structural racism and includes discrimination of all kinds, including that of gender and caste, because of which a considerable population is directly bound to suffer the harsh impacts of the climate change. The climate change and gender literature has come a long way in demonstrating concrete examples of how structural inequalities operate. The political and micro-political aspects and how they interact with structural inequalities are also important to understand vulnerability. Henrique and Tschakert (2020) shows how the many adaptation efforts benefit powerful actors, while further entrenching the poor and disadvantaged in cycles of dispossession. This critical analysis recommends acknowledging injustices, embracing deliberation and nurturing responsibility for human and more-than-human others. Garcia et al. (2020) describes the socio-political drivers of gendered inequalities that produce discriminatory opportunities for adaptation. They use an intersectional subjectivities lens to examine how entrenched power dynamics and social norms related to gender create barriers to adaptation, such as lack of resources and agency. The analysis shows a pronounced dichotomy as women experience the brunt of these barriers and a persistent power imbalance that positions them as ‘less able’ to adapt than men.Historical marginality and exclusion are context-specific conditions that shape vulnerability (Leichenko and Silva, 2014). There is also robust evidence that gender inequalities contribute to climate vulnerability, and that consideration of gender is a key approach to climate justice (see Cross-Chapter Box GENDER in Chapter 18). There is robust evidence for the differentiated impacts of climate change and climate-orientated policies on women (McOmber, 2020). For example, Friedman et al. (2019) show that, in Ghana, homogeneous representations of women farmers and a technical focus of climate-orientated policy interventions may threaten to further marginalise the most vulnerable and exacerbate existing inequalities. Climate change impacts can also heighten existing gender inequalities (Jost et al., 2016; Glazebrook et al., 2020). On the one hand, climate change impacts can be gendered as a result of customary roles in society, such as triple workloads for women (i.e., economic labour, household and family labour, and duties of community participation), and occupational hazards from gendered work indoors and outdoors (Murray et al., 2016). On the other, climate change hazards interact with changing gender roles in society, such as urban migration of both men and women in ways that break with tradition (Bhatta et al., 2016).Gender influences the way that people also experience loss and process psychological and emotional distress of losses, such as mortality of children and other relatives in climate-related disasters (Chandra et al., 2017).Women’s capacities are often constrained due to their roles in their household and society, institutional barriers and social norms. These constraints result in low adaptive capacity of women, which make them more vulnerable to hazards. As more men seek employment opportunities away from home, women are required to acquire new capacities to manage new challenges, including risks from climate change. Banerjee et al. (2019b) finds that capacity-building interventions for women staying behind, which aimed to strengthen autonomous adaptation measures (e.g. precautionary savings and flood preparedness), also positively influenced women to approach formal institutions. Besides, the intervention households were more likely to invest a part of the precautionary savings in flood preparedness measures than control households.Next to the direct differential impacts of climate change on different social groups, the impacts of climate change can also exacerbate inequality due to the lower access and limited ability to benefit from services provided by ecosystems. Marginalised poor people often significantly depend on the access to surrounding environments, natural resources and ecosystem services for their livelihoods, for leisure or cultural practices. Thus shifts in such resources, for example, due to the bleaching of coral reefs or shifts in fish stock, also cause severe challenges and risks to these communities (Leal Filho, 2018; Le, 2019; UNTTSDCC, 2014).Overall, the assessed literature highlights that climate change impacts are not emerging in isolation from development context and development pathways. Economic and social ramifications mean that they may exacerbate poverty and marginalisation (Finkbeiner et al., 2018; Dogru et al., 2019). Choudhary et al. (2019) and Orimoloye et al. (2019) highlight how the effects of climate change can be even more prejudicial to poor countries, which, in most cases, already suffer from weak governance, high prevalence of informal settlements and lack of resources. Health, livelihood assets and economy are examples of aspects that will worsen as a result of the negative impacts of climate change and failure to provide opportunities for sustainable adaptation (United Nations, 2015). These facts highlight the importance of mitigation and adaptation measures especially in these regions characterised by high levels of vulnerability (see also Section 8.3).