Social and cultural factors are closely linked to values, beliefs and identities (Heimann and Mallick, 2016) and mediate the ways in which people respond to climate variability and change (Adger et al., 2013). There is limited evidence but medium agreement  about the importance and role of social and cultural factors in shaping adaptation, in terms of both the need to adapt and the way it is presented and communicated, although evidence is somewhat mixed in terms of how experiences of weather affect opinions and perceptions of climate change (Howe et al., 2019). Research also highlights the importance of context in understanding relations between perceptions of risks and behaviour, arguing that power relations and other obstacles and opportunities play a vital role in shaping actions (Rufat et al., 2020). In general, nonetheless, adaptation is spurred when people perceive that there is an action they can take to make a difference (Kuruppu and Liverman, 2011; Mayer and Smith, 2019), although it cannot be assumed that action will be taken if the socio-cultural setting is not amenable and it contravenes the values underlying people’s perceptions (Kwon et al., 2019). Research testing for the effect of beliefs on behavioural change from 48 countries highlighted the need for policy leaders to present climate change as solvable yet challenging, if fatalistic beliefs that act as barriers to adaptation were to be reduced (Mayer and Smith, 2019). This demonstrates how beliefs do not always reinforce actions, even when risks are perceived. Similarly, research from Burkina Faso working with the Fulbe ethnic group found that cultural norms restricted engagement in four of the most successful livelihood strategies that support adaptation to climate change (labour migration, working for development projects, gardening and female engagement in economic activities) (Nielsen and Reenberg, 2010). Cultural factors therefore play an important but under-researched role in adaptation.Social factors in the context of adaptation, by contrast, are more widely studied. The literature on adaptation and the role of social capital as an enabler is diverse. There is high confidence that during disasters, social capital plays an important role in linking those who are affected to external supports and resources. On small islands, social networks can be dense and support adaptation (Petzold and Ratter, 2015), with traditional knowledge and societal cohesion helping small island communities to have self-belief and build resilience even in the absence of external interventions (Nunn and Kumar, 2018). Even the development of weak ties (e.g., one-way information transfer) can lead to the establishment of mutual collaboration relations that can be more easily drawn on in times of climate change-related shocks and stresses (Ingold, 2017), while collective shared disaster experiences can cause new social groups to emerge and spur action, linked to a perceived common fate (Ntontis et al., 2020). However, this can exacerbate inequalities and create new ones, with those who are more connected having enhanced access to, for example, shelters following storm evacuations or earthquakes (Rahill et al., 2014). In adapting to more incremental changes, social capital has been shown to increase shared local knowledge and awareness, support participatory processes and strengthen ties to corporate and political institutions, increasing their responsiveness to local concerns, as shown by examples from Aldrich et al. (2016). They describe how in Houma, Louisiana, located west of New Orleans, rising sea levels and hurricane risks have drawn on and built social capital at the community level. Having what was perceived locally as insufficient federal government support, residents, church groups and town council members collaborated to spur adaptation. Community mobilisation led to construction of self-funded levees and water projects to protect 200,000 residents from storm surges. Projects include marshland restoration, the elevation of existing housing, improved pumping systems and canal drainage, as well as buyouts and relocations of businesses and housing that has been repetitively damaged. Funds were raised from households through donations via a self-imposed sales tax. While this example paints a positive picture of the role of social capital and collective action in adaptation activities, it also raises questions about the coherence of actions across levels, again, highlighting a role for polycentric governance if risks of maladaptation are to be reduced. The danger in the example presented here is that should federal plans conflict with the community level work in the future, local efforts may have been in vain if installations have to be removed. This highlights the importance of careful evaluation of all adaptation options on an ongoing basis.Further warnings about social capital as an adaptation enabler come from Acosta et al. (2016) who recognise that it may be detrimental to private adaptation in some cases. Their research in rural Ethiopia found that qualitative measures of trust predict contributions to public goods, supporting theories about collective action, but that the effects of social capital are not homogenous: it can be helpful in some contexts, but unhelpful, or even detrimental in others. This led them to highlight the need for policymakers to consider these potentially different outcomes. Other research, also from Ethiopia, suggested that households with more social capital are more specialised in their livelihood strategies. This could leave them more vulnerable to climate change impacts (as per the Cyclone Aila example where shrimp farmers were specialised and hit hardest by the cyclone’s impacts), though social capital acts as a kind of informal insurance (Wuepper et al., 2018).