The archaeology and history of Indigenous Peoples and Euroamerican farmers show that climate variability can have severe impacts on livelihoods, food security and personal safety. Traditional societies developed numerous methods to cope with variability but have always expanded to the limits of what those adaptations permit. Current knowledge and technology can buffer societies from many negative effects of climate change already experienced but will be severely challenged by the novel conditions we are now creating. People came into North America more than 15,000 years ago and have experienced both massive and minor shifts in climate ever since. At the end of the last very cold phase of the most recent Ice Age, about 11,500 years ago, temperatures rose extremely rapidly—as much as 10°C (18°F) in a decade in some regions. This undoubtedly contributed to the extinction of large mammals like mammoths and mastodons that people hunted alongside many other resources (see Cross-Chapter Box PALEO in Chapter 1). There were so few people on the land, though, and other resources were so abundant, that the long-standing human means of coping with climate variability—switching foods and moving on—were sufficient.Following the end of the Ice Age, populations across North America grew for the next few thousand years, at a rate that increased once people began to domesticate corn (maize), beans and squash (the ‘three sisters’) as well as other crops. However, more people meant less mobility, and farmers traditionally are also more invested in their fields and remaining in place than foragers are to hunting grounds. Other means of coping with vulnerability to food shortage caused by climate variability included some continued hunting and gathering of wild resources, planting fields in multiple locations and with different crops, storage in good years, and exchange with neighbours and neighbouring groups.According to archaeological evidence, however, these adaptation strategies were not always sufficient during times of climate-induced stress. Human remains showing the effects of malnutrition are fairly common, and conflict caused in part by climate-induced shortfalls in farming has left traces that include fortified sites, sites placed in defensible locations and trauma to human bone. Larger and more hierarchical groups emerged, first in Mesoamerica and then in the southwest and southeast USA as well as the Midwest USA. These groups offered the possibility of buffering poor production in one area with surplus from another, but they also tended to increase inequality within their borders and often attempted to expand at the expense of their neighbours, introducing new sources of potential conflict. Dense hierarchical societies also arose in other areas such as the northwest coast where agriculture was not practised but resources, such as salmon and roots, were abundant and either relatively constant or storable.These societies were not immune to climate hazards despite their greater population and more formal organisation. Archaeological evidence strongly suggests that drought, or growing conditions that were too hot or cold, contributed to the decline of groups ranging from Classic-period Maya states in Mesoamerica, to the somewhat less hierarchical societies of Chaco in the southwest USA and Cahokia in the Midwest USA (Figure FAQ14.2.1). The usual pattern seems to be that climatic variability compounded social and environmental problems that were already challenging these societies.Figure FAQ14.2.1 | Examples of areas where past climate variability has contributed to crises. Climatic variability is most likely to lead to crisis when it is accompanied by social, demographic and political conditions or environmental mismanagement that compound climatic impacts on societies.Still, Indigenous knowledge and traditional knowledge among Euroamerican farming communities provide guidelines for how to cope with traditional problems. Contemporary governmental restrictions (such as legal water-rights allocations, international borders and tribal-lands boundaries) have limited the adaptive capacity that Indigenous societies have developed over the centuries. Now human-caused climate forcing, if not mitigated by reducing heat-trapping GHGs, is expected to produce climates in North America that have no local analogues in human history even as it destroys heritage sites that are sources of knowledge about palaeoclimates and the diverse ways of coping with them that past peoples have discovered. Just as past peoples often avoided local climate change by moving on, in a world where mobility options are severely limited, a lesson from archaeology and history is that we should use our hard-won knowledge of the causes of climate change to avoid creating futures with no past analogues to provide useful guidance.Open figure If societies in North America prior to the Euroamerican colonisation were vulnerable to climate variability, surely were not the more recent and technologically advanced societies of North America at lower risk? The 20th century Dust Bowl created in the US and Canadian prairies suggests otherwise. Severe drought conditions throughout the 1930s—which, to make matters worse, peaked during the Great Depression—did not cause either the USA or Canada to collapse. But both countries suffered massive economic losses, regional loss of topsoil and regional human strife (including loss of crops, income and farms) leading to migration. Yet anthropogenic global climate change was of little or no consequence in the 1930s. While farming practices made climate stress worse, the climate variability itself was either completely, or mostly, within the envelope of historical climate variability that earlier human societies had experienced.Indigenous Peoples and Euroamerican farmers and ranchers have a long history of mostly successful adaptation to changing weather patterns. The wisdom held by Indigenous Peoples deep knowledge of how plants, animals and atmospheric conditions provide early warning signals of approaching weather shifts, and stories about how past communities have tried to cope with climate-related resource shortfalls. Long-standing community-level management of resources also helps prevent shortfalls, and institutions such as kin groups, church groups, clubs and local governments (which exist in communities of both Euroamericans and Indigenous Peoples, in different forms) can be powerful aids in ameliorating shortfalls and resolving conflict.