Since AR5, there has been significant growth in research about climate education and activism (Simpson, Napawan and Snyder, 2019; O’Brien, Selboe and Hayward, 2018; Hayward, 2021). Access to knowledge is an important determinant of well-being, inclusivity and livelihood mobility and of driving human behaviour. Knowledge systems include formal educational provision (capital assets, syllabus and human capital), informal learning based in social interaction and customary institutions (including through social media) and public communication (news media, government and other information systems including commercial messaging). There is a growing body of literature addressing the role of information and communication technology in shaping behaviour in disaster response and recovery and climate action, with particular focus on social media use and serious gaming (Houston  et al., 2015; Carson  et al., 2018) (see Section 6.3.4.3)Given the amount of time that children spend in school settings, adapting educational infrastructure and programmes to climate change is highly important. This includes not only making physical structures safe, but also providing students with the knowledge and confidence to support individual and family-based adaptation. Several UN agencies (e.g., UNICEF and UNDRR) and international non-governmental agencies (e.g., Plan International) have prioritised safer schools and child-centred risk management that often focus on schools as places that should be prioritised for retrofitting and safe construction, but also as focal points for knowledge dissemination and community organising where impacts can extend beyond the school to reduce risk among students’ families. Universities and think tanks, as well as the third and private sector are key support mechanisms, particularly at the local level and when working in collaboration with local government and communities. They can support the development of critical educational resources and innovative communication methods, as well as facilitate the design and implementation of climate policies and related action plans.Youth, adult communities, social media and the commercial media can have a significant impact on advancing climate awareness and the legitimacy of adaptive action, particularly in large urban areas (medium evidence, high agreement ). Climate change education in urban settlements has increasingly focused on enhancing children and young people’s political agency in schools, universities, and in formal and informal media settings (Cutter-Mackenzie and Rousell, 2019). However, an ambiguous framing of climate impacts and adaptation, for example around the science of urban heat islands by the media, can also exacerbate local community confusion and uncertainty (Iping  et al., 2019) and further training and capacity building opportunities such as for vocational qualifications is still required across diverse settings (Simmons, 2021). Communication strategies deployed in formal education and social media can be highly influential in exchanging information and establishing narratives and viewpoints that frame what adaptive action is legitimate, especially in large cities (Simpson, Napawan and Snyder, 2019). However, the effectiveness of communication strategies for change, for example from Mayoral offices, can also be influenced by wider political and structural drivers including community literacy or political partisanship (Boussalis, Coan and Holman, 2019). Recent research (e.g., Macintyre  et al., 2018) highlights the need for new learning approaches to climate education from school age to adult education. Emphasis is on inclusivity in learning and recognising diverse perspectives across multiple levels and settings, from formal and informal education to wider social learning. Informal learning that takes place outside of school settings, such as in libraries and botanical gardens, in everyday life is increasingly recognised as a key arena for climate education, life-long learning and nurturing environmental citizenship and activism (Paraskeva-Hadjichambi  et al., 2020).