Researchers and policymakers alike are interested in using observed empirical patterns of learning to project future reductions in costs of technologies. Studies cutting across a wide range of industrial sectors (not just energy) have tried to relate cost reductions to different functional forms, including cost reductions as a function of time (Moore’s law) and cost reductions as a function of production or deployment (Wright’s law, also known as Henderson’s law), finding that those two forms perform better than alternatives combining different factors, with costs as a function of production (Wright’s law) performing marginally better (Nagy et al. 2013). A comparison of expert elicitation and model-based forecasts of the future cost of technologies for the energy transition indicates that model-based forecast medians were closer to the average realised values in 2019 (Meng et al. 2021).Recent studies attempt to separate the influence of learning by doing (which is a basis of Wright’s law) versus other factors in explaining cost reductions, specifically in energy technologies. Some studies explain cost reductions with two factors: cumulative deployment (as proxy for experience); and R&D investment – see the ‘two factor’ learning curve (Klaassen et al. 2005). However, reliable information on public energy R&D investments for developing countries is not systematically collected. Available data for OECD countries cannot be precisely assigned to specific industrial sectors or sub-technologies (Verdolini et al. 2018). Some learning-curve studies take into account that historical variation in technology costs could be explained by variation in key materials and fuel costs – for example, steel costs for wind turbines (Qiu and Anadon 2012), silicon costs (Nemet 2006; Kavlak et al. 2018) as well as coal and coal plant construction costs (McNerney et al. 2011). Economies of scale played a significant role in the PV cost reductions since the early 2000s (Yu et al. 2011) (Box 16.4), which can also become the case in organic PV technologies (Gambhir et al. 2016; Kavlak et al. 2018).