As indicated in Table 5.6, ‘Shift’ policies have various forms such as the demand for low-carbon materials for buildings and infrastructure in manufacturing and services and shift from meat-based protein, mainly beef, to plant-based diets of other protein sources ( high evidence, high agreement ) (Springmann et al. 2016 a; Ritchie et al. 2018; Willett et al. 2019). Governments also play a direct role beyond nudging citizens with information about health and well-being.While the effectiveness of these policies on behaviour change overall may be limited (Pearson-Stuttard et al. 2017; Shangguan et al. 2019), there is some room for policy to influence actors upstream, such as industry and supermarkets, which may give rise to longer-term, structural change.Table 5.6 | Examples of policies to enable ‘Shift’ options. Mitigation optionPerceived struggles to overcomePolicy to overcome struggles (Incentives)  More walking, less car use, train rather air travelAdequate infrastructure may be absent, speed a part of modern life–Congestion charges (Pearson-Stuttard et al. 2017; Shangguan et al. 2019); deliberate urban design including cycling lanes, shared micromobility, and extensive cycling infrastructure; synchronised/integrated transport system and timetable–Fair street space allocation (Creutzig et al. 2020)Multifamily housingZonings that favour single family homes have been dominant in planning (Hagen 2016)Taxation, relaxation of single-family zoning policies and land use regulation (Geffner 2017)Shifting from meat to other proteinMinimal meat required for protein intake, especially in developing countries for population suffering from malnutrition and when plant-based protein is lacking (Garnett 2011; Sunguya et al. 2014; Behrens et al. 2017; Godfray et al. 2018); dominance of market-based instruments limits governments’ role to nudging citizens with information about health and well-being, and point-of-purchase labelling (Pearson-Stuttard et al. 2017; Shangguan et al. 2019)–Tax on meat/beef in wealthier countries and/or households (Edjabou and Smed 2013; Säll and Gren 2015)–Nationally recommended diets (Garnett 2011; Sunguya et al. 2014; Behrens et al. 2017; Godfray et al. 2018)Material-efficient product design, packagingResistance by architects and builders who might perceive risks with lean designs. Cultural and social norms. Policy measures not keeping up with changes on the ground such as increased consumption of packagingEmbodied carbon standards for buildings (IEA 2019c)Architectural design with shading and ventilationLack of education, awareness and capacity for new thinking, local air pollutionIncentives for increased urban density and incentives to encourage architectural forms with lower surface-to-volume ratios and increased shading support (Creutzig et al. 2016a)Mobility services is one of the key areas where a combination of market-based and command-and-control measures have been implemented to persuade large numbers of people to get out of their automobiles and take up public transport and cycling alternatives (Gehl et al. 2011). Congestion charges are often complemented by other measures, such as company subsidies for bicycles, to incentivise the shift to public mobility services. Attracting people to public transport requires sufficient spatial coverage of transport with adequate level of provision, and good quality service at affordable fares (Sims et al. 2014; Moberg et al. 2019) ( high evidence, high agreement ). Cities such as Bogota, Colombia, Buenos Aires, Argentina, and Santiago, Chile, have seen rapid growth of cycling, resulting in a six-fold increase in cyclists (Pucher and Buehler 2017). Broadly, the history and type of city determines how quickly the transition to public modes of transport can be achieved. For example, cities in developed countries enjoy an advantage in that there is a network of high-quality public transport predating the advent of automobiles, whereas cities in less developed countries are latecomers to large-scale network infrastructure (UN-Habitat 2013; Gota et al. 2019).