Given the global climate system is committed to additional future warming, different portfolios of adaptation, mitigation, and sustainable development interventions are relevant for climate risk management. The different strands of literature discussed above can be integrated to help inform thinking about combinations of approaches to climate risk management. Globally, low climate change projections, versus higher climate change projections, imply greater mitigation, lower climate risks and less adaptation. This implies greater mitigation trade-offs in terms of overall economic development, food crop prices, energy prices and overall household consumption, but lower climate risk, with sustainable development synergies such as human health and lower adaptation trade-offs, and an uneven distribution of effects (very high confidence) (Roy et al., 2018).Sustainable development considerations could be used to prioritise mitigation options, but as noted earlier, there are trade-offs, with a potentially significant impact on the economic cost of mitigation, as well as a potential trade-off in terms of the climate outcomes that are still viable (Riahi et al., 2022). For instance, all of the 1.5°C scenarios used in IPCC (2018a) deploy carbon dioxide removal technologies (Rogelj et al., 2018). Without these technologies, most models cannot generate pathways that limit warming to 1.5°C, and those that are able to adopt strong assumptions about global policy development and socioeconomic changes. Sustainable development might also affect the design of policies by prioritising specific sustainable development objectives. However, there are trade-offs here as well, with costs and the distribution of costs varying with alternative policy designs. For instance, prioritising air quality has climate co-benefits but does not ensure the lowest cost climate strategy (Arneth et al., 2009; Kandlikar et al., 2009). Similarly, prioritising land protection has a variety of co-benefits but could increase food prices significantly, as well as the overall cost of climate mitigation (IPCC, 2019b). In this context, with lower climate risk and adaptation levels and larger mitigation effort, managing mitigation trade-offs could be a sustainable development priority. Furthermore, sustainable development could also be tailored to facilitate adaptation and manage mitigation costs.Globally, high climate change projections imply lower mitigation effort, higher climate risks and greater adaptation. This implies lower mitigation trade-offs, but greater climate risk with greater demand of adaptation and potential for trade-offs in terms of competing sustainable development priorities. Sustainable development considerations could affect adaptation options. For instance, constraining options such as relocation or facilitating adaptation capacity and community resilience. Sustainable development might also be tailored to affect the climate outcome by shaping the development of emissions. In this context, with greater climate risk and adaptation levels and less mitigation effort, facilitating adaptation addressing adaptation costs and trade-offs could be a sustainable development priority.Locally, there are many qualitative similarities to the global perspective in thinking about risk management combinations across lower versus higher levels of warming. However, there is one very important difference. Local decision makers are confronted with uncertainty about what others will do beyond their local jurisdiction. With future climate a function of the sum of global decisions, sustainable development planning needs to consider the possibility of more and less emissions reduction action globally and the potential associated climates. This implies the need for sustainable development to manage for the possibility of higher levels of warming by further facilitating adaptation and managing adaptation trade-offs. Prioritising sustainable development locally is also supported by the insight that the impacts on poverty depend at least as much or more on development than on the level of climate change (very high confidence) (Wiebe et al., 2015; Hallegatte and Rozenberg, 2017).With surpassing 1.5°C a distinct possibility, considering higher levels of warming is a necessity. CRD could be pursued with additional adaptation, recognizing increasing challenges for adaptation and sustainable development with higher warming, just as there are increasing challenges for mitigation and sustainable development with limiting warming to lower levels. There are many possible pathways for pursuing climate resilient development, though our understanding of the possibilities with different levels of warming is currently limited (e.g., David Tàbara et al., 2018; O’Brien, 2018). The current literature suggests that different mixes of adaptation and mitigation strategies, and sustainable development and trade-off management priorities, measures and reallocations (Section 18.5.3.1), will be appropriate for different expected climates and locations (Section 18.1.2); while trade-offs between climates will be dictated by relative nonlinearities, feasibilities, shifts in priorities, and trade-off and reallocation options across future climates.Finally, it is important to note that there is currently limited information available regarding the following: (1) local implications of 1.5°C versus warmer futures with respect to local climate outcomes, avoided impacts and sustainable development implications and interactions, given that applying global conclusions to local, national and regional settings can be misleading; (2) local context-specific synergies and trade-offs with respect to adaptation, mitigation and sustainable development for 1.5°C futures; and (3) standard indicators for monitoring factors related to CRD (Roy et al., 2018).