The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change ( UNFCCC), Kyoto Protocol, and Paris Agreement are supporting rising levels of national ambition and encouraging the development and implementation of climate policies at multiple levels of governance (high confidence). The Kyoto Protocol led to reduced emissions in some countries and was instrumental in building national and international capacity for GHG reporting, accounting and emissions markets (high confidence). The Paris Agreement, adopted under the UNFCCC, with near universal participation, has led to policy development and target-setting at national and sub-national levels, particularly in relation to mitigation but also for adaptation, as well as enhanced transparency of climate action and support (medium confidence). Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), required under the Paris Agreement, have required countries to articulate their priorities and ambition with respect to climate action. {WGII 17.4, WGII TS D.1.1; WGIII SPM B.5.1, WGIII SPM E.6}Loss & Damage 82  was formally recognized in 2013 through establishment of the Warsaw International Mechanism on Loss and Damage (WIM), and in 2015, Article 8 of the Paris Agreement provided a legal basis for the WIM. There is improved understanding of both economic and non-economic losses and damages, which is informing international climate policy and which has highlighted that losses and damages are not comprehensively addressed by current financial, governance and institutional arrangements, particularly in vulnerable developing countries (high confidence).{WGII SPM C.3.5, WGII Cross-Chapter Box LOSS}Other recent global agreements that influence responses to climate change include the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (2015-2030), the finance-oriented Addis Ababa Action Agenda (2015) and the New Urban Agenda (2016), and the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer (2016), among others. In addition, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, adopted in 2015 by UN member states, sets out 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and seeks to align efforts globally to prioritise ending extreme poverty, protect the planet and promote more peaceful, prosperous and inclusive societies. If achieved, these agreements would reduce climate change, and the impacts on health, well-being, migration, and conflict, among others (very high confidence). {WGII TS.A.1, WGII 7 ES}Since AR5, rising public awareness and an increasing diversity of actors, have overall helped accelerate political commitment and global efforts to address climate change (medium confidence). Mass social movements have emerged as catalysing agents in some regions, often building on prior movements including Indigenous Peoples-led movements, youth movements, human rights movements, gender activism, and climate litigation, which is raising awareness and, in some cases, has influenced the outcome and ambition of climate governance. (medium confidence). Engaging Indigenous Peoples and local communities using just-transition and rights-based decision-making approaches, implemented through collective and participatory decision-making processes has enabled deeper ambition and accelerated action in different ways, and at all scales, depending on national circumstances (medium confidence). The media helps shape the public discourse about climate change. This can usefully build public support to accelerate climate action (medium evidence, high agreement ). In some instances, public discourses of media and organised counter movements have impeded climate action, exacerbating helplessness and disinformation and fuelling polarisation, with negative implications for climate action (medium confidence). {WGII SPM C.5.1, WGII SPM D.2, WGII TS.D.9, WGII TS.D.9.7, WGII TS.E.2.1, WGII 18.4; WGIII SPM D.3.3, WGIII SPM E.3.3, WGIII TS.6.1, WGIII 6.7, WGIII 13 ES, WGIII Box.13.7}