The AR5 report was a major step forward in the assessment of the human influence on the Earth’s water cycle, yet regional projections of precipitation and water resources often remained very uncertain for a range of reasons including modelling uncertainty and the large influence of internal variability (Sections 1.4.3 and 8.5.2; Hawkins and Sutton, 2011; Deser et al. , 2012). Since AR5, longer and more homogeneous observational and reanalysis datasets have been produced along with new ensembles of historical simulations driven by all or individual anthropogenic forcings. These factors, together with improved detection-attribution tools, has enabled a more comprehensive assessment and a better understanding of recent observed water cycle changes, including the competing effects of GHGs and aerosol emissions. New paleoclimate reconstructions have been also developed, particularly from the SH, that were not available at the time of AR5. There have also been advances in modelling clouds, precipitation, surface fluxes, vegetation, snow, floodplains, groundwater and other processes relevant to the water cycle. Convection permitting and cloud-resolving models have been implemented over increasingly large domains and can be used as benchmarks for the evaluation of the current-generation climate models. The added value of increased resolution in global or regional climate models can be also assessed more thoroughly based on dedicated model intercomparison projects (Sections 10.3.3 and 8.5.1). Ongoing research activities on decadal predictions and observational constraints are aimed at narrowing the plausible range of near-term (2021–2040) to long-term (2081–2100) water cycle changes.This chapter assesses water cycle changes and considers climate change from the perspective of its effects on water availability (including streamflow and soil moisture, snow mass and glaciers, groundwater, wetlands and lakes) rather than only precipitation. The chapter highlights the sensitivity of the water cycle to multiple drivers and the complexity of its responses, depending on regions, seasons and time scales. Anthropogenic drivers include not only emissions of GHGs but also different species of aerosols, land and water management practices. Emphasis is placed on assessing the full range of projections, including ‘low likelihood, high impact’ climate trajectories such as the potential for abrupt changes in the water cycle.The chapter starts with theoretical evidence that link small-scale processes and drivers, as well as global energy budget and large-scale circulation constraints to physically-understood changes in the global water cycle (Section 8.2). Observed and projected water cycle changes (Sections 8.3 and 8.4, respectively) are assessed in separate sections, but with a parallel structure to facilitate comparison of a specific topic across sections. Projections are primarily assessed on the basis of contrasted emissions scenarios to emphasize the water cycle response to mitigation. Unless otherwise specified, projected anomalies are estimated relative to the 1995–2014 baseline climatology and are assessed over 20-year time slices, 2021–2040, 2041–2060 and 2081–2100 for near-, mid- and long-term changes respectively. Beyond multi-model ensemble means, model response uncertainty, the influence of natural climate variability, and the potential non-linearities in the regional water cycle response are also considered (Section 8.5). Low likelihood but physically plausible high-impact scenarios are also assessed, especially the potential for abrupt climate change (Section 8.6). Final remarks about future studies on water cycle changes (Section 8.7) are also provided, and the chapter addresses three frequently asked questions (FAQs) on the water cycle’s sensitivity to land use change (FAQ 8.1), the projected occurrence and severity of floods (FAQ 8.2) and droughts (FAQ 8.3) at the global scale. This chapter outline is summarized with a schematic (Figure 8.2) which also provides a quick guide to the main topics addressed across the different sections.Figure 8.2 | Visual guide to Chapter 8. Open figure(Chapter 8 has multiple links across all AR6 WGI chapters, so necessarily includes references to other chapter subsections and figures. Model evaluation of large-scale circulation and precipitation is mostly covered by Chapter 3, while hydrological extremes are covered by Chapter 11. Chapter 8 focuses on key processes relevant to the water cycle and their resolution-dependent representation in models. Observed and projected changes in large-scale circulation and precipitation are primarily assessed in Chapters 2, 3 and 4. Beyond global and regional mean precipitation amounts, Chapter 8 also focuses on other precipitation properties (e.g., frequency, intensity and seasonality) and other water cycle variables (evapotranspiration, runoff, soil moisture and aridity, solid and liquid freshwater reservoirs). Key regional phenomena (e.g., tropical overturning circulations, monsoons, extratropical stationary waves and storm tracks, modes of variability and related teleconnections) are also assessed given their major dynamical contribution to regional water cycle changes. Although the biosphere and the cryosphere are key components of the water cycle, a more comprehensive assessment of their responses can be found in Chapters 5 and 9, respectively. Further assessment on regional water cycle changes can be found in Chapters 10 to 12 and in the Atlas. The reader is also referred to the interactive (Atlas for a more detailed assessment of the range of model biases and responses at the regional scale. Beyond WGI, water is also a major topic for both adaptation and mitigation policies so has strong connections with both WGII and WGIII. Assessment of hydrological impacts at basin and catchment scales, including a broader discussion on adaptation and vulnerability, potential threats to water security, societal responses, improving resilience in water systems and related case studies is provided in WGII (Chapter 4).