Changes to soil carbon stocks in response to climate change are a potentially strong positive feedback (Cox et al., 2000). Since AR5 (WGI, Section 6.4.2), progress has been made in understanding soil carbon dynamics, and associated feedbacks. Advances include: (i) an increased understanding of and ability to quantify high-latitude soil carbon feedbacks (Box 5.1); (ii) increased understanding of the causes responsible for soil carbon persistence on long time scales, particularly the interactions between decomposers and soil organic matter and mineral assemblages (Kleber et al., 2007; Schmidt et al., 2011; Luo et al., 2016); and (iii) increased understanding of soil carbon dynamics in subsurface layers (Hicks Pries et al., 2017; Balesdent et al., 2018).CMIP6 ESMs predict losses of soil carbon with warming, which are larger than climate-driven vegetation carbon losses (Arora et al., 2020). As in CMIP5 (Todd-Brown et al., 2013), there is also a large CMIP6 ensemble spread in climate-driven soil carbon changes, partially driven by a large spread in the current soil carbon stocks predicted by the models. In CMIP5 ESMs, much of the soil carbon losses with warming can be traced to decreased carbon inputs, with a weaker contribution from changing soil carbon lifetimes due to faster decomposition rates (Koven et al., 2015b), which may be an artefact of the lack of permafrost carbon (Box 5.1). Isotopic constraints suggest that CMIP5 ESMs systematically overestimated the transient sensitivity of soil14C responses to atmospheric14C changes, implying that the models respond too quickly to changes in either inputs or turnover times, and that therefore the soil contribution to all feedbacks may be weaker than currently projected (He et al., 2016). Using natural gradients of soil carbon turnover as a constraint on long-term responses to warming suggests that both CMIP5 and CMIP6 ESMs may systematically underestimate the temperature sensitivity at high latitudes, and may overestimate the temperature sensitivity in the tropics (Koven et al., 2017; Wieder et al., 2018; Varney et al., 2020), although experimental soil warming in tropical forests suggest high sensitivity of decomposition to warming in those regions as well (Nottingham et al., 2020).Peat soils, where thick organic layers build up due to saturated and anoxic conditions, represent another possible source of carbon to the atmosphere. Peats could dry, and decompose or burn as a result of climate change in both high (Chaudhary et al., 2020) and tropical (Cobb et al., 2017) latitudes, and in combination with anthropogenic drainage of peatlands (Warren et al., 2017). Peat carbon dynamics are not included in the majority of CMIP6 ESMs. Soil microbial dynamics shift in response to temperature, giving rise to complex longer-term trophic effects that are more complex than the short-term sensitivity of decomposition to temperature. Such responses are observed in response to long-term warming experiments (Melillo et al., 2017). While most CMIP6 ESMs do not include microbial dynamics, simplified global soil models that do include such dynamics show greater uncertainty in projections of soil carbon changes, despite agreeing more closely with current observations, than the linear models used in most ESMs (Wieder et al., 2013; Guenet et al., 2018).In nutrient-limited ecosystems, prolonged soil warming can induce a fertilization effect through increased decomposition, which increases nutrient availability and thereby vegetation productivity (Melillo et al., 2011). Models that include this process tend to show a weaker carbon–climate feedback than those that do not (Thornton et al., 2009; Zaehle et al., 2010; Wårlind et al., 2014; Meyerholt et al., 2020). In CMIP6, six out of 11 ESMs include a representation of the nitrogen cycle, and the mean of those models predicts a weaker carbon–climate feedback than the overall ensemble mean (Arora et al., 2020; Section 5.4.8). These models only partly account for the interactions of nutrient effects with other processes, such as shifts of vegetation zones under climate changes (Sakaguchi et al., 2016) leading to either changes in species composition or changes in plant tissue nutrient to carbon ratios (Thomas et al., 2015; Achat et al., 2016; Du et al., 2019).The  high agreement and multiple lines of evidence that warming increases decomposition rates lead to  high confidence that warming will, overall, result in carbon losses relative to a constant climate and contribute to the positive carbon–climate feedback (Section 5.4.8). However, the wide spread in ESM projections and the lack of model representation of key processes that may amplify or mitigate soil carbon losses on longer time scales (including microbial dynamics, permafrost, peatlands, and nutrients) lead to low confidence in the magnitude of global soil carbon losses with warming.