With rapid advances of technologies, the use of appropriate technologies generates some degree of management problems. To resolve such problems, the enhancement of information science is essential to understand design, implementation and adoption of digital tools under crisis (Xie et al., 2020). For example, social media research reveals a way of controlling malicious information (Tanaka et al., 2014), and its characteristics under COVID-19–showing a plain text message–can be more powerful in the context of citizen engagement than media-rich communications (Chen et al., 2020b). Information behaviour needs more investigation to understand how people survive and connect in the era of information overload (Pan et al., 2020). Moreover, a new set of data (e.g., travel history record, personal health data, etc.) becomes an important base of DRR (Xie et al., 2020). Analysis of these personal data requires careful consideration, as it generates ethical issues (Sakurai and Chughtai, 2020). Indicators or measurements of technology-enabled crisis response needs to be developed for further risk reduction (Akbari and Kolokotsa, 2016; Wong et al., 2020). On the other hand, adopting infrastructure technologies requires investment, and due to the inherent uncertainties of climate projections, the future payoffs of these investments are also somewhat uncertain (Ginbo et al., 2020). In the water and infrastructure sectors, for example, various options exist for conducting cost–benefit analysis considering future uncertainty (i.e., so-called robust approaches, which are able to identify adaptation projects and infrastructure that can achieve their intended purpose(s) across a wide range of climate scenarios) (Dittrich et al., 2016). Despite substantial investment and progress in research, development and capacity building in the recent past, the majority of the developing countries in Asia are struggling to manage both water resources and the agriculture sector. Considering the frequent extreme weather conditions, progress in management tasks has become even more mammoth and, hence, we need a holistic solution, which is currently missing in field implementation. This solution should be based on advanced science and technology in association with other attributes like social, economic and political dynamics, which play a pivotal role in sustainable management of water resources and agriculture, as a way forward.