The concept of CRD presents an ambitious agenda for actors at multiple scales—global to local, particularly in the manner in which it reframes climate action to integrate a broader set of objectives than simply reducing GHG emissions or adapting to the impacts of climate change. Specifically, recent literature extends policy goals for climate action beyond avoiding dangerous interference with the climate system to adopt normative goals of meeting basic human needs, eliminating poverty and enabling sustainable development in ways that are just and equitable. This creates a policy landscape for climate action that is not only richer, but also more complex in that it situates responses to climate change squarely within the development arena. Current policy goals associated with the Paris Agreement, Sendai Framework and the SDGs imply aggressive timetables. Yet, as noted in the AR5 and supported by more recent literature (Section 18.2.1), the world is neither on track to achieve all of the SDGs nor fulfil the Paris Agreement’s objective of limiting the increase in the global mean temperature to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit warming 1.5°C. (Denton et al., 2014; IPCC, 2018a). This places aspirations for CRD in a precarious position. Transitions will be necessary across multiple systems (Section 18.1.3). While some may be already underway, the pace of those transitions must accelerate, and societal transformations may be necessary to enable CRD (Sections 18.3, 18.4, Box 18.1).Given the pace of climate change and the inherent challenge of sustainable development, particularly in the face of inevitable disruptions and setbacks such as the COVID-19 pandemic (Cross-Chapter Box COVID in Chapter 7), the feasibility of achieving CRD is an open question. Rapid changes will be required to shift public and private investments, strengthen institutions and orient them towards more sustainable policies and practices, expand the inclusiveness of governance and the equity of decision making, and shift societal and consumer preferences to more climate-resilient lifestyles. Nevertheless, the collective body of recent literature on CRD, system transitions and societal transformation, combined with the assessments within recent IPCC Special Reports (IPCC, 2018a; IPCC, 2019b; IPCC, 2019d) indicate that there are a broad range of opportunities for designing and implementing adaptation and mitigation options that enable the climate goals in the Paris Agreement to be achieved while enhancing resilience and meeting sustainable development objectives. However, options should be considered alongside the mechanisms by which societies can engage to create the conditions that can support the implementation of those options (Section 18.4). This includes formal policy mechanisms pursued by governments, the catalysation of innovation by private firms and entrepreneurship, as well as informal, grassroots interventions by civil society. While there is no ‘one-size-fits-all’ solution for CRD that will work for all actors at all scales, exploring different pathways by which actors can achieve their development and climate goals can make valuable contributions to developing effective strategies for CRD.A fundamental challenge for achieving CRD globally is reconciling different perspectives on CRD. As noted in the AR5, ‘as policy makers explore what pathways to pursue, they will increasingly face questions about managing discourses about what societal objectives to pursue’ (Denton et al., 2014: 1124). Since the AR5, such discourses have become prominent in policy debates over climate action and sustainable development because of different nations, communities and subpopulations having different understandings of what constitutes CRD. Aggressive efforts to rapidly reduce GHG emissions or enhance resilience to climate change, for example, could have negative externalities for the development objectives of some actors. This potential for trade-offs complicates efforts to build consensus regarding what constitutes appropriate climate and development policies and practices and by whom. The CRD pathways preferred by one actor are likely to be contested by others. This means operationalising concepts such as CRD in practice is likely to necessitate ongoing negotiation.Ultimately, one of the critical developments within the literature is the emergence of procedural and distributive justice as key criteria for evaluating climate action and CRD more specifically. This trend not only recognises the need to prevent vulnerable human and ecological systems from experiencing disproportionate harm from the changing climate, but also the need to prevent those same systems from being harmed by mitigation, adaptation and sustainable development policies and practices. Failure to adequately engage with equity and justice when designing sustainability transitions could lead to maladaptation, aggravated poverty, reinforcement of existing inequalities, and entrenched gender bias and exclusion of Indigenous and marginalised communities (Jenkins et al., 2018; Fisher et al., 2019; Schipper et al., 2020b). These consequences could ultimately slow, rather than accelerate, CRD. Hence, developing programmes and practices for prioritising equity in effective transition risk management is an important dimension of enabling CRD.As indicated by the literature assessed within this chapter, keeping windows of opportunity open for CRD will necessitate urgent action, even under diverse assumptions regarding how future mitigation and adaptation interventions evolve. If nations are to collectively limit warming to well below 2°C, for example, unprecedented emissions reductions will be necessary over the next decade (IPCC, 2018a). These reductions would necessitate rapid progression of system transitions (Section 18.3). If, despite the Paris Agreement, future emissions trajectories take the world beyond 2°C, a greater demand will be placed on adaptation as a means of enhancing the resilience of development. Given the long-lived nature of human systems, and the built environment in particular, significant adaptation investments would be needed over the near-term to meet this demand. Yet, it is important to note that, even in the absence of consideration for climate change, substantial development needs exist for communities around the world at present. Hence, a robust strategy for the pursuit of CRDPs is a near-term focus on portfolios of policies and practices that promote human and ecological well-being.