As of 2019, more than 10,000 cities and regions (Hsu et al. 2020a) have recorded participation in a transnational or cooperative climate action network, which are voluntary membership networks of a range of subnational governments such as cities, as well as regional governments like states and provinces (Hsu et al. 2020a). These organisations, often operating across and between national boundaries, entail some type of action on climate change. Among the most prominent climate networks are GCoM, ICLEI, and C40, all of which ask their members to adopt emission reduction commitments, develop climate action plans, and regularly report on emissions inventories.Municipal and regional networks and agreements have provided a platform for urban actors to engage in international climate policy (Fraundorfer 2017; Keller 2017; Fuhr et al. 2018; Hsu et al. 2018, 2020b; Westman and Broto 2018; Kern 2019; Seto et al. 2021). Their impact comes through (i) providing resources for cities and regions to reduce their GHG emissions and improve environmental quality more generally, independent of national policy; (ii) encouraging knowledge transfer between member cities and regions; and (iii) acting as platforms of national and international policy influence (Castán Broto 2017b; Fuhr et al. 2018).Subnational governments that participate in transnational climate networks, however, are primarily located in developed countries, particularly Europe and North America, with far less representation in developing countries. In one of the largest studies of subnational climate mitigation action, more than 93% of just over 6000 quantifiable subnational climate commitments come from cities and regions based in the European Union (NewClimate Institute et al. 2019). Such gaps in geographic coverage have been attributed to factors such as the dominating role of Global North actors in the convening and diffusion of ‘best practices’ related to climate action (Bouteligier 2013), or the more limited autonomy or ability of subnational or non-state actors in Global South countries to define boundaries and interests separately from national governments, particularly those that exercise top-down decision-making or have vertically integrated governance structures (Bulkeley et al. 2012). Many of the participating subnational actors from under-represented regions are large megacities (of 10 million people or more) that will play a pivotal role in shaping emissions trajectories (Data Driven Yale et al. 2018; NewClimate Institute et al. 2019).While these networks have proven to be an important resource in local-level mitigation, their long-term effects and impact at larger scales is less certain (Valente de Macedo et al. 2016; Fuhr et al. 2018). Their influence is most effective when multiple levels of governance are aligned in mitigation policy. Nevertheless, these groups have become essential resources to cities and regions with limited institutional capacity and support (for more on transnational climate networks and transnational governance more broadly, see Sections 13.5 and 14.5).