Investing in RDI for low-GHG process emissions is risky and uncompetitive in the absence of convincing climate policy. Research investment should be guided by assessing options, technology readiness levels, and roadmaps towards technology demonstration and commercialisation. The potential GHG and environmental implications need to be assessed early on to assess the sustainability implications and to direct research needs (Yao and Masanet 2018; Zimmerman et al. 2020). Strategic areas for RDI can be focused on a set of possible process options for producing basic materials using fossil-free energy and feedstock, or CCU and CCS (Sections11.3.5 and 11.3.6). Policies to enhance RDI include public funding for applied research, technological and business model experimentation, pilot and demonstration projects, as well as support for education and training – which further have the positive side effect of leading to spill-overs and network effects through labour market mobility and collaboration (Nemet et al. 2018). Innovative business models will not emerge if the transition is not considered along the full value chain with a focus on materials efficiency, circularity, and new roles for industry in a transitioning energy system, including possibly providing demand response for electricity through designed-in flexibility, for example, by combining electrolysis hydrogen production with substantial storage (Vogl et al. 2018).Fostering collaborative innovation across sectors through the support of knowledge sharing and capabilities building is important as mitigation options involve new or stronger sectoral couplings (Tönjes et al. 2020). One example is linking chemicals to forestry in the upscaling of forest bio-refineries, although it has proven to be difficult to engage a diverse group of actors in such collaborations (Karltorp and Sandén 2012; Bauer et al. 2018). Heterogeneous collaboration and knowledge exchange can be encouraged through conscious design of RDI programs and by supporting network initiatives involving diverse actor groups (Van Rijnsoever et al. 2015; Söderholm et al. 2019).