The Fifth Assessment Report (AR5, Jiménez Cisneros et al., 2014) concluded that for each degree of global warming, approximately 7% of the global population, under a scenario of moderate population growth, was projected to be exposed to a decrease of renewable water resources of at least 20%. In addition, AR5 reported negative impacts on streamflow volumes, its seasonality (specifically in cryospheric zones), a decline in raw water quality (medium evidence, high agreement ) and projected reduction in renewable surface water and groundwater in most dry tropical regions. AR5 projected an increase in meteorological, agricultural and hydrological droughts in dry regions (medium confidence) (Jiménez Cisneros et al., 2014).The Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C (SR1.5) assessed that limiting global warming to 1.5°C is expected to substantially reduce the probability of extreme droughts, precipitation deficits and risks associated with water availability in some regions (medium confidence). On the other hand, higher risks to natural and human systems in a 2.0°C world would mean increased vulnerability for the poor, showing that socioeconomic drivers are expected to have a more significant influence on water-related risks and vulnerabilities than changes in climate alone (medium confidence) (Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018).The Special Report on Oceans and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (SROCC) confirmed findings from AR5, with robust evidence of declines in snow cover and negative mass balance in most glaciers globally. Glacier melting seriously threatens water supply to mountain communities and millions living downstream through water shortages, jeopardising hydropower generation, irrigation and urban water uses (Hock et al., 2019b). Additionally, Arctic hydrology will be affected by permafrost changes, negatively impacting Arctic communities’ health and cultural identity (Meredith et al., 2019).The Special Report on Climate Change and Land (SRCCL) stated that groundwater over-extraction for irrigation is causing depletion of groundwater storage (high confidence). The report also noted that precipitation changes, coupled with human drivers, will have a role in causing desertification, and water-driven soil erosion is projected to increase due to climate change (medium confidence). The population vulnerable to impacts related to water is projected to increase progressively at 1.5°C, 2°C and 3°C of global warming, with half of those impacted residing in South Asia, followed by Central Asia, West Africa and East Asia. SRCCL stated that improved irrigation techniques (e.g., drip irrigation) and moisture conservation (e.g., rainwater harvesting using indigenous and local practices) could increase farmers’ adaptive capacity (high confidence) (Mirzabaev et al., 2019).The Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) Working Group I (WGI) (Douville et al., 2021) concluded that anthropogenic climate change has increased atmospheric moisture and precipitation intensity (very likely  by 2–3% per 1°C) (high confidence), increased terrestrial ET (medium confidence) and contributed to drying in dry summer climates including in the Mediterranean, southwestern Australia, southwestern South America, South Africa and western North America (medium to high confidenc e), and has caused earlier onset of snowmelt and increased melting of glaciers (high confidence) since the mid-20th century. The report also stated with high confidence that the water cycle variability and extremes are projected to intensify, regardless of the mitigation policy. The share of the global population affected by water-related hazards and water availability issues is projected to increase with the intensification of water cycle variability and extremes. They concluded with high confidence that strong and rapid mitigation initiatives are needed to avert the manifestation of climate change in all components of the global water cycle.Building on these previous reports, this chapter advances understanding climate change-induced hydrological changes and their societal impacts and risk in several key ways.First, since AR5, the methodology of climate change impact studies has advanced and these methodological advances are described in SM4.1. AR6 uses new projections (CMIP6) based on the SSPs and other scenarios, and we assess those results in this chapter alongside those using other projections and scenarios.Second, this chapter follows the developments set in motion by SR1.5, SRCCL and SROCC to incorporate Indigenous knowledge (IK), traditional knowledge (TK) and local knowledge (LK). SR1.5 stated that disadvantaged and vulnerable populations, including Indigenous Peoples and certain local communities, are at disproportionately higher risk of suffering adverse consequences due to global warming of 1.5°C or more (Roy et al., 2018). SRCCL highlighted the enhanced efficacy of decision-making and governance with the involvement of local stakeholders, particularly those most vulnerable to climate change, such as Indigenous Peoples (Arneth et al., 2019). SROCC found adaptation efforts have benefited from the inclusion of IK and LK (IKLK) (Abram et al., 2019). In this chapter, we engage directly with Indigenous contributing authors and use multiple evidence-based approaches, as undertaken by the IPBES (Tengö et al., 2014; Tengö et al., 2017). This approach is guided by the understanding that the co-production of knowledge (between scholars and local communities) about water and climate change vulnerability, impacts and adaptation has the potential to lead to new water knowledge and context-specific governance strategies (Arsenault et al., 2019; Chakraborty and Sherpa, 2021). Additionally, shifting beyond the exclusive use of technical knowledge and Western viewpoints redresses the shortcomings of resource- and security-oriented understandings to water and acknowledges the more holistic and relational approaches common to IKLK (Section 4.8.4) (Stefanelli et al., 2017; Wilson, 2019; Chakraborty and Sherpa, 2021).Finally, grounded in the AR6 goal to expand the solution space, this chapter advances the understanding of adaptation in the water sector since AR5 by deploying a meta-analysis of adaptation measures. The meta-analysis focuses on both current adaptation responses (Section 4.7.1) and future projected adaptation responses, which have been modelled (Section 4.7.2). The meta-review assesses the outcomes of current adaptation responses and effectiveness of future projected adaptations in reducing climate and associated risks. Studies derived from the Global Adaptation Mapping Initiative (GAMI) database (Berrang-Ford et al., 2021a) (see Chapter 16) were coded systematically following a meta-review protocol developed specifically for this assessment (Mukherji et al., 2021; SM4.2). A similar meta-review protocol was also developed to assess effectiveness of adaptations to reduce projected climate risks (Section 4.7.2; SM4.2).