This section assesses projected changes in precipitation at regional scales. Note that changes in precipitation seasonality are assessed in Box 8.2 and that changes in regional monsoons are assessed in Section 8.4.2.4, where both circulation and rainfall are considered. Further assessments of regional projections of precipitation are presented in Chapters 10, 12 and the Atlas, while a comprehensive assessment of changes in precipitation extremes is provided in Chapter 11.The AR5 assessed that the contrast of mean precipitation amount between dry and wet regions and seasons is expected to increase over most of the globe as temperatures increase (high confidence), but with large regional variations. Precipitation over the high latitudes, equatorial Pacific Ocean, mid-latitude wet regions, and monsoon regions were assessed as likely  to increase under the RCP8.5 scenario, and in many mid-latitude and subtropical dry regions as likely  to decrease (AR5 Chapters 7, 12, and 14). Extreme precipitation over most mid-latitude land areas and wet tropical regions was assessed as very likely  to become more intense and more frequent.Geographical patterns of projected precipitation changes show substantial seasonal contrasts and regional differences, including over land (Figure 8.14 and Figure 4.27). Projections for 2081–2100under the SSP2-4.5scenariosuggest increased precipitation over the tropical oceans, north-eastern Africa, the Arabian Peninsula, India, south-eastern Asia and the Polar regions while decreased precipitation is projected mainly over the subtropical regions (Section 4.5.1.4). Precipitation changes contrast regionally in the tropics with wetter wet seasons over South Asia, central Sahel and eastern Africa, but less precipitation over Amazonia and coastal West Africa (Section 8.4.2.4). These large-scale responses are associated with stronger moisture transports in a warmer climate that are modulated by the greater warming over land than ocean, atmospheric circulation responses and land surface feedbacks (Section 8.2.2). There is agreement across CMIP5 and CMIP6 modelling studies that precipitation increases in wet parts of the atmospheric circulation and decreases in dry parts (Liu and Allan, 2013; Kumar et al., 2015; Deng et al., 2020; Schurer et al., 2020) although these regions shift with atmospheric circulation changes. The overall pattern is robust across different model scenarios and time horizons (Tebaldi and Knutti, 2018), but some deviations from the mean pattern cannot be excluded due to the multiple time scales and non-linear atmospheric or land surface processes involved (Section 8.5.3). Near-term regional changes in precipitation are more uncertain because of a stronger sensitivity to natural variability (Section 8.5.2) and non-GHG anthropogenic forcings (Section 4.4.1.3 and 8.4.3.1).Figure 8.14 | Projected long-term relative changes in seasonal mean precipitation. Global maps of projected relative changes (%) in seasonal mean of precipitation averaged across available CMIP6 models (number provided at the top right of each panel) in the SSP2-4.5 scenario. All changes are estimated for 2081–2100 relative to the 1995–2014 base period. Uncertainty is represented using the simple approach. No overlay indicates regions with high model agreement, where ≥80% of models agree on sign of change; diagonal lines indicate regions with low model agreement, where <80% of models agree on sign of change. For more information on the simple approach, please refer to the Cross-Chapter Box Atlas.1. Further details on data sources and processing are available in the chapter data table (Table 8.SM.1). Open figureProjected changes in regional precipitation also arise as a response to changes in large-scale atmospheric circulation (Section 8.2.2.2 and 8.4.2), both in the tropics (Chadwick et al. , 2016b; Byrne et al. , 2018) and extratropics (Shaw, 2019; Oudar et al., 2020b). Despite variability in simulated changes, CMIP5 climate models consistently project large rainfall changes (of varying sign) over considerable proportions of tropical land during the 21st century (Chadwick et al., 2016b). Since AR5, some robust responses in large-scale circulation patterns have been identified. For example, and as further assessed in Section 8.4.2, CMIP6 models project a northward shift in the tropical rain belt over eastern Africa and the Indian Ocean and a southward shift in the eastern Pacific and Atlantic oceans (Mamalakis et al., 2021). A projected strengthening and tightening of the tropical rain belt increases the contrasts between wet and dry tropical weather regimes and seasons. It is less clear how the well understood poleward expansion of the subtropics and mid-latitude storm tracks influences precipitation over subtropical and mid-latitude continents (Section 8.2.2.2).An ensemble of 31 CMIP6 models under the SSP5-8.5 scenario projects increases precipitation by 10–30% over much of the USA and decreases by 10–40% over Central America and the Caribbean by 2080–2099 (Almazroui et al., 2021). This CMIP6 ensemble also projects an increase in annual precipitation over the southern Arabian Peninsula and a decrease over the northern Arabian Peninsula, as also projected by CMIP3 and CMIP5 models (Almazroui et al., 2020a). Annual mean precipitation is projected to increase over South Asia during the 21st century under all scenarios, although the rate of change varies within the region based on 27 CMIP6 models (Almazroui et al., 2020c). CMIP6 projections also display a reduction in annual mean precipitation over northern and southern Africa while increases are projected over Central Africa, under the SSP1-2.6, SSP2-4.5 and SSP5-8.5 scenarios (Almazroui et al., 2020b). The AR6 (Atlas assesses that regions where annual mean rainfall is likely  to increase include the Ethiopian Highlands, East, South and North Asia, south-eastern South America, northern Europe, northern and eastern North America, and the Polar Regions. In contrast, regions where annual mean rainfall is likely  to decrease include southern Africa, coastal West Africa, Amazonia, south-western Australia, Central America, south-western South America, and the Mediterranean.The AR5 identified that high-latitude precipitation increase may lead to an increase in snowfall in the coldest regions and a decrease of snowfall in warmer regions due to a decreased number of freezing days. The fraction of precipitation falling as snow and the duration of snow cover was projected to decrease. Heavy snowfall events globally are not expected to decrease significantly with warming as they occur close to the water freezing point, which will migrate poleward and in altitude (O’Gorman, 2014; Turner et al., 2019). There are only a small number of studies evaluating the implications of this mechanism in specific regions. A study for the north-eastern USA indicates smaller reductions for major snowfall events against the broader decline in snowfall expected from thermodynamic effects (Bintanja and Andry, 2017). Arctic snowfall is projected to decrease as rainfall makes up more of the precipitation (Zarzycki, 2018).Beyond annual or seasonal mean precipitation amounts, an implication of the parallel intensification of the global water cycle and of the increased residence time of atmospheric water vapour (Section 8.2.1) is that the distribution of daily and sub-daily precipitation intensities will experience significant changes (Pendergrass and Hartmann, 2014b; Pendergrass et al., 2015; Bador et al., 2018; Douville and John, 2021), with fewer but potentially stronger events (high confidence) (Section 4.3.3). CMIP6 projections show that in the long-term more drier days but more intense single events of precipitation are expected, regardless of scenario (Figure 8.15). Over almost all land regions, it is very likely  that extreme precipitation will intensify at a rate close to the 7% °C–1 of global warming, but with large spatial differences (Sections 11.4 and 8.2.3.2). The projected increase in precipitable water is expected to lead to an increase in the highest possible precipitation intensities and an increase in the probability of occurrence of extreme precipitation events on the global scale (Neelin et al., 2017), regardless of how annual-mean precipitation changes (O’Gorman and Schneider, 2009; O’Gorman, 2015). The projected increase in heavy precipitation intensity is also found for daily mean precipitation intensity though at a lower rate (Pendergrass and Hartmann, 2014a).Figure 8.15 | Projected long-term relative changes in daily precipitation statistics. Global maps of projected seasonal mean relative changes (%) in the number of dry days (i.e., days with less than 1 mm of rain) and daily precipitation intensity (in mm day–1, estimated as the mean daily precipitation amount at wet days – for example, days with intensity above 1 mm day–1) averaged across available CMIP6 models (number provided at the top right of each panel) in the SSP1-2.6 (a, b), SSP2-4.5 (c, d) and SSP5-8.5 (e, f) scenario respectively. Uncertainty is represented using the simple approach. No overlay indicates regions with high model agreement, where ≥80% of models agree on sign of change; diagonal lines indicate regions with low model agreement, where <80% of models agree on sign of change. For more information on the simple approach, please refer to the Cross-Chapter Box Atlas.1. Further details on data sources and processing are available in the chapter data table (Table 8.SM.1). Open figureAn increase in the number of dry days is also projected in several regions of the world (Polade et al., 2014; Berthou et al., 2019a), which can dominate the annual precipitation change at least in the subtropics (Polade et al., 2014; Douville and John, 2021). These findings are supported by CMIP6 projections showing a widespread increase in daily mean precipitation intensity over land (Figure 8.15b,d,f) as well as an increase in the number of dry days in the subtropics and over Amazonia and Central America (Figure 8.15a,b,c). Such changes in precipitation regimes, as well as the general increase in the frequency and intensity of precipitation extremes (Section 11.4.5), contribute to an overall increase in precipitation variability (Polade et al., 2014; Pendergrass et al., 2017; Douville and John, 2021). This is also found in CMIP6 models, which show a stronger increase of interannual variability than in seasonal mean precipitation changes, apart from in the winter extratropics where both quantities increase at the same rate with increasing global warming levels (Figure 8.16).Figure 8.16 | Rate of change in components of water cycle mean and variability across increasing global warming levels. Relative change (%) in seasonal mean total precipitable water (grey line), precipitation (red solid lines), runoff (blue solid lines), as well as in standard deviation of precipitation (red dashed lines) and runoff (blue dashed lines) averaged over extratropical land in  (c) summer and  (d)  winter, and tropical land in  (a) June–July–August (JJA) and  (b) December–January–February (DJF) as a function of global mean surface temperature for the CMIP6 multi-model mean across the SSP5-8.5 scenario. Extratropical winter refers to DJF for Northern Hemisphere and JJA for Southern Hemisphere (and the reverse for extratropical summer). Each marker indicates a 21-year period centred on consecutive decades between 2015 and 2085 relative to the 1995–2014 base period. Precipitation and runoff variability are estimated by their standard deviation after removing linear trends from each time series. Error bars show the 5–95% confidence interval for the warmest 5°C global warming level. Figure adapted from Pendergrass et al. (2017) and updated with CMIP6 models. Further details on data sources and processing are available in the chapter data table (Table 8.SM.1). Open figureIn summary, it is virtually certain that global precipitation will increase with warming due to increases in GHG concentrations and decreases in air pollution. There is  high confidence that total precipitation will increase in the high latitudes, with a shift from snowfall to rainfall except in the coldest regions and seasons. There is also  high confidence that precipitation will decrease over the Mediterranean, southern Africa, Amazonia, Central America, south-western South America, south-western Australia and coastal West Africa and that monsoon precipitation will increase over South Asia, East Asia and central-eastern Sahel. See (Section 8.4.2.4 for a more detailed assessment of changes in regional monsoons. Daily mean precipitation intensities, including extremes, are projected to increase over most regions (high confidence). The number of dry days is projected to increase over the subtropics, Amazonia, and Central America (medium confidence). There is  high confidence in an overall increase in precipitation variability over most land areas.