Many of the observed outcomes of climate change, for example, migration, are also outcomes of multidimensional poverty in low-income countries (Burrows and Kinney, 2016). Future impacts may be better understood if the vulnerability and the capacity for adaptation is understood to be rooted in a sustainable development context (see Box 8.2). The UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which aim to reduce poverty and inequality, and identify options for achieving development progress, also provide insight on reducing climate vulnerability (United Nations, 2015). First, climate change impacts may undermine progress toward various SDGs (medium confidence), primarily poverty reduction (SDG1), zero hunger (SDG2), gender equality (SDG5) and reducing inequality (SDG10), among others (medium evidence, high agreement ). In both developing and high-income countries, climate change hazards in connection with other non-climatic drivers already accelerate trends of wealth inequality (SDG 1) (Leal Filho et al., 2020b). Climate impacts on SDGs illustrate the complex interrelations in development. For example, in regions encountering obstacles to SDGs, characterised by high levels of inequality and poverty, such as in Africa, Central Asia and Central America, climate change is exacerbating water insecurity (SDG 6), which may then also drive food insecurity (SDG 2), impacting the poor directly (e.g., via crop failure), or indirectly (e.g., via rising food prices) (Conway et al., 2015; Hertel, 2015; Cheeseman, 2016; Rasul and Sharma, 2016). There is a pressing need to address poverty issues, since these may negatively influence the implementation of all SDGs (Leal Filho et al., 2021a).At the same time, there is increasing evidence that successful adaptation depends on equitable development and climate justice; for example, gender inequality (SDG 5) and discrimination (SDG 16) are among the barriers to effective adaptation (high confidence) (Bryan et al., 2018; Onwutuebe, 2019; Garcia et al., 2020). Likewise, both climatic and non-climatic threats to development, such as conflict (SDG 16), may seriously undermine capacity to formulate and implement adaptation policies, and design planning pathways (Hinkel et al., 2018). The risk of conflict associated with climate change has great potential to undermine other development goals (Box 8.4). Where sustainable development lags and human vulnerability is high, there is also often also a severe adaptation gap (Figure 8.12; Birkmann et al., 2021a). The SDGs may provide important cues on how to close the adaptation gap: climate action needs to be prioritised where past and future climate change impacts threaten SDGs, and where investment in SDGs improve capacity for adaptation (see Section 8.6). 