The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted many aspects of urban life while raising questions about urban densities, transportation, public space, and other urban issues. The impact of COVID-19 on urban activity and urban GHG emissions may offer insights into urban emissions and their behavioural drivers and may include structural shifts in emissions that last into the future. The science is unclear as to the links between urban characteristics and COVID-19, and involves multiple aspects. For example, some research shows higher COVID-19 infection rates with city size (e.g., Dalziel et al. 2018; Stier et al. 2021), as well as challenges to epidemic preparedness due to high population density and high volume of public transportation (Layne et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2020). Other research from 913 metropolitan areas shows that density is unrelated to COVID-19 infection rates and, in fact, has been inversely related to COVID-19 mortality rates when controlled for metropolitan population.Densely populated counties are found to have significantly lower mortality rates, possibly due to such advantages as better health care systems, as well as greater adherence to social-distancing measures (Hamidi et al. 2020). Sustainable urbanisation and urban infrastructure that address the SDGs can also improve preparedness and resilience against future pandemics. For example, long-term exposure to air pollution has been found to exacerbate the impacts of COVID-19 infections (Wu et al. 2020b), while urban areas with cleaner air from clean energy and greenspace, can provide advantages.Some studies indicate that socio-economic factors, such as poverty, racial and ethnic disparities, and crowding are more significant than density in COVID-19 spread and associated mortality rate (Borjas 2020; Maroko et al. 2020; Lamb et al. 2021). The evidence for the connection between household crowding and the risk of contagion from infectious diseases is also strong. A 2018 World Health Organization (WHO) systematic review of the effect of household crowding on health concluded that a majority of studies of the risk of non-tuberculosis infectious diseases, including flu-related illnesses, were associated with household crowding (Shannon et al. 2018).Though preliminary, some studies suggest that urban areas saw larger overall declines in emissions because of lower commuter activity and associated emissions. For example, researchers have explored the COVID-19 impact in the cities of Los Angeles, Baltimore, Washington, DC, and San Francisco Bay Area in the United States. In the San Francisco region, a decline of 30% in anthropogenic CO2 was observed, which was primarily due to changes in on-road traffic (Turner et al. 2020). Declines in the Washington, DC/Baltimore region and in the Los Angeles urban area were 33% and 34%, respectively, in the month of April 2020 compared to previous years (Yadav et al. 2021).At the global scale COVID-related lockdown and travel restrictions reduced daily CO2 emissions by –17% in early April 2020 compared to 2019 values (Le Quéré et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020b), though subsequent studies have questioned the accuracy of the indirect proxy data used (Oda et al. 2021). Research at the national scale in the United States found that daily CO2 emissions declined –15% during the late March to early June time period (Gillingham et al. 2020). Research in China estimated that the first quarter of 2020 saw an 11.5% decline in CO2 emissions relative to 2019 (Zheng et al. 2020; Han et al. 2021). In Europe, estimates indicated a –12.5% decline in the first half of 2020 compared to 2019 (Andreoni 2021). Rebound to pre-COVID trajectories has been evidenced following the ease of travel restrictions (Le Quéré et al. 2021). It remains unclear to what extent COVID resulted in any structural change in the underlying drivers of urban emissions.Changes in local air pollution emissions, particularly due to altered transportation patterns, have caused temporary air quality improvements in many cities around the world (see critical review by Adam et al. 2021). Many outdoor air pollutants, such as particulates, nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide, and volatile organic compounds declined during national lockdowns. Levels of tropospheric ozone, however, remained constant or increased. A promising transformation that has been observed in many cities is an increase in the share of active travel modes such as cycling and walking (Sharifi and Khavarian-Garmsir 2020). While this may be temporary, other trends, such as increased rates of teleworking and/or increased reliance on smart solutions that allow remote provision of services provide an unprecedented opportunity to transform urban travel patterns (Belzunegui-Eraso and Erro-Garcés 2020; Sharifi and Khavarian-Garmsir 2020).Related to the transport sector, the pandemic has resulted in concerns regarding the safety of public transport modes, which has resulted in significant reductions in public transport ridership in some cities (Bucsky 2020; de Haas et al. 2020) while providing opportunities for urban transitions in others (Newman AO 2020). Considering the significance of public transportation for achieving low-carbon and inclusive urban development, appropriate response measures could enhance health safety of public transport modes and regain public trust (Sharifi and Khavarian-Garmsir 2020). Similarly, there is a perceived correlation between the higher densities of urban living and the risk of increased virus transmission (Hamidi et al. 2020; Khavarian-Garmsir et al. 2021).While city size could be a risk factor with higher transmission in larger cities (Hamidi et al. 2020; Stier et al. 2021), there is also evidence showing that density is not a major risk factor and indeed cities that are more compact have more capacity to respond to and control the pandemic (Hamidi et al. 2020). Considering the spatial pattern of density, even distribution of density can reduce the possibility of crowding that is found to contribute to the scale and length of virus outbreak in cities. Overall, more research is needed to better understand the impacts of density on outbreak dynamics and address public health concerns for resilient cities.Cities could seize this opportunity to provide better infrastructure to further foster active transportation. This could, for example, involve measures, such as expanding cycling networks and restricting existing streets to make them more pedestrian- and cycling-friendly contributing to health and adaptation co-benefits, as discussed in Section 8.2 (Sharifi 2021). Strengthening the science–policy interface is another consideration that could support urban transformation (Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1).