The regional evidence on attribution for single AR6 regions generally shows low confidence for a human contribution to observed trends in meteorological droughts at regional scale, with few exceptions (Section 11.9). There is medium confidence that human influence has contributed to increases in agricultural and ecological droughts in the dry season in some regions and has led to an overall increase in the affected land area. At regional scales, there is medium confidence in a contribution of human-induced climate change to increases in agricultural and ecological droughts in the Mediterranean and Western North America (Section 11.9). There is medium confidence that human-induced climate change has contributed to an increase in hydrological droughts in the Mediterranean region, but also medium confidence in contributions from other human influences, including water management and land use (Section 11.9). Several meteorological and agricultural and ecological drought events have been attributed to human-induced climate change, even in regions where no long-term changes are detected (medium confidence). However, a lack of attribution to human-induced climate change has also been shown for some events (medium confidence).In summary, human influence has contributed to increases in agricultural and ecological droughts in the dry season in some regions due to increases in evapotranspiration (medium confidence). The increases in evapotranspiration have been driven by increases in atmospheric evaporative demand induced by increased temperature, decreased relative humidity and increased net radiation over affected land areas (high confidence). There is low confidence that human influence has affected trends in meteorological droughts in most regions, butmedium confidence that they have contributed to the severity of some single events. There is medium confidence that human-induced climate change has contributed to increasing trends in the probability or intensity of recent agricultural and ecological droughts, leading to an increase of the affected land area. Human-induced climate change has contributed to global-scale change in low flow, but human water management and land-use changes are also important drivers (medium confidence).