As noted in Section 4.3.1, policy approaches that include a broader range of instruments and initiatives would impact more fundamentally on the actors, institutions and structures of societies and the dynamics among them, aiming to alter the underlying drivers of emissions, opening up a wider range of mitigation opportunities and potential in the process of achieving societal development goals. While the evolution of these drivers is subject to varied influences and complex interactions, there are policy measures by which decision-makers might influence them. Table 4.12 provides some examples of policy measures that can affect key drivers (shown in the row headings).Table 4.12 | Examples of policies that can help shift development pathways. DriversExamples of policy measuresBehaviour–Progressive taxation–Ecological tax reform–Regulation of advertisement–Investment in public transit–Eco-labellingGovernance and institutions–Campaign finance laws–Regulatory transparency–Commitment to multilateral environmental governance–Public investment in education and R&D–Public-service information initiatives–Public sector commitment to science-based decision-making–Anti-corruption policiesInnovation–Investment in public education–Public sector R&D support–Fiscal incentives for private investments in public goods–International technology development and transfer initiativesFinance and investment–International investment treaties support common objectives–Litigation and liability regulations–Reform of subsidies and other incentives not aligned with–Insurance sector and pension regulation–Green quantitative easing–Risk disclosurePolicies such as those listed in Table 4.12 are typically associated with broader objectives than GHG mitigation. They are generally conceived and implemented in the pursuit of overall societal development objectives, such as job creation, macroeconomic stability, economic growth, and public health and welfare. However, they can have major influence on mitigative capacity, and hence can be seen as necessary tools if mitigation options are to be significantly broadened and accelerated (medium evidence, medium agreement). The example of the UK shows how accelerated mitigation through dietary changes require a wide set of efforts to shift underlying drivers of behaviour. In this case, multiple forces have interacted to lead to reduced meat consumption, including health attitudes, animal welfare concerns, and an increasing focus on climate and other environmental impacts of livestock production, along with corporate investment in market opportunities, and technological developments in meat alternatives (Box 5.5).Other historic cases that are unrelated to recent mitigation efforts might be more appropriate examples of major socio-technical shifts that were largely driven by intentional, coherent intentional policy initiatives across numerous domains to meet multiple objectives. The modernisation of agriculture in various national contexts fits such a mold. In the USA, for example, major government investments in agricultural innovation through the creation of agricultural universities and support for research provided advances in the technological basis for modernisation. A network of agricultural extension services accelerated the popularization and uptake of modern methods. Infrastructure investments in irrigation and drainage made production more viable, and investment in roadways and rail for transport supported market formation. Agricultural development banks made credit available, and government subsidies improved the profitability for farmers and agricultural corporations. Public campaigns were launched to modify food habits (Ferleger 2000).Further examples of SDPS across many different systems and sectors are elaborated across this report. Concrete examples assessed in this chapter include high employment and low emissions structural change, fiscal reforms for mitigation and social contract, combining housing policies to deliver both housing and transport mitigation, and change economic, social and spatial patterns of development of the agriculture sector provide the basis for sustained reductions in emissions from deforestation (Sections 4.4.1.7–4.4.1.10). These examples differ by context. Examples in other chapters include transformations in energy, urban, building, industrial, transport, and land-based systems, changes in behaviour and social practices, as well as transformational changes across whole economies and societies (Cross-Chapter Box 5 in this chapter, Section 5.8, Box 6.2, Sections 8.2, 8.3.1, 8.4, 9.8.1, 9.8.2 and 10.4.1, and Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 16). These examples and others can be understood in the context of an explanation of the concept of SDPS, and how to shifting development pathways (Cross-Chapter Box 5 in this chapter).