Multiple feedbacks between individual risks exist that have the potential to create cascades (WEF, 2018; IPCC, 2019c p. 680; Simpson et al., 2021) and then to amplify systemic risks and impacts far beyond the level of individual RKRs (medium confidence). Scientific research, however, remains limited on whether such interactions would result in increasing or decreasing the initial impact(s), and hence risk severity across systems. Given the scope of this chapter on increasing risk severity, here we focus on assessing RKR interactions that lead to increasing risk. Drawing directly on RKR assessments (Sections 16.5.2.3.2–16.5.2.3.8), this section cites those assessments rather than primary literature. The arrows in Figure 16.11 are derived from a qualitative analysis by three authors of Chapter 16 of the material provided by chapters on KRs and RKR assessments (Section 16.5.2.3), and do not result from any systematic and quantitative approach as done in some recent studies (e.g., WEF, 2018; Yokohata et al., 2019).Figure 16.11 | Illustration of some connections across key risks. Panel A describes all the cross-RKR risk cascades that are described in RKR assessments (Sections 16.5.2.3.2–16.5.2.3.8). Panel B builds on Section 16.5.2 and Table SM16.24 to provide an illustration of such interactions at the key risk level, for example from ecological risk to key dimensions for human societies. The arrows are representative of interactions as qualitatively identified in this chapter; they do not result from any quantitative modelling exercise.Open figure Interactions at the RKR level (Figure 16.11, panel A)—climate change will combine with pre-existing socioeconomic and ecological conditions (grey blocks on the left-hand-side of panel A in Figure 16.10) to generate direct and second-order effects (black plain arrows) both on the structure and/or functioning of ecosystems (RKR-B) and on some natural processes such as the hydrologic cycle (RKR-G), for example. This then translates into implications not only for biodiversity but also for natural resources that support livelihoods, which will in turn affect food security (especially food availability; RKR-F), water security (especially access to adequate quantities of acceptable quality water; RKR-G) and the living standards of already vulnerable groups and aggregate economic outputs at the global level (RKR-D). CIDs (IPCC, 2021) will also directly affect infrastructure that are critical to ensure some basic conditions for economies to function (RKR-C), for example through transportation within and outside the country, energy production and international trade. Such disturbances to socioecological systems and economies pose climate-related risks to human health (RKR-E) as well as to peace and human mobility (RKR-H). Indeed, while health is concerned with direct influence of climate change, for example through hotter air temperatures impacting morbidity and mortality or the spatial distribution of disease vectors such as mosquitos, it is also at risk of being stressed by direct and secondary climate impacts on living standards, food security and water security (RKR-D, RKR-F, RKR-G, respectively). Increased poverty, increased hunger and limited access to drinkable water are well-known drivers of poor health conditions. The role of impact cascades is even more prominent in the case of peace and human mobility (RKR-H), even though the scientific literature does not conclude on any clear and direct climate influence on armed conflict and human migration. Rather, climate-induced degradation of natural resources that are vital for subsistence agriculture and fisheries, transformational and long-term consequences on livelihoods (e.g., new risks, increasing precarious living conditions, gendered inequity, etc.), and erosion of social capital due to exacerbated tension within and between communities are considered among the main drivers of armed conflicts and forced displacement, therefore highlighting links with water security (RKR-G) and living standards (RKR-D), for example.RKR assessments also suggest that some feedback effects are at work (arrows moving from the right to the left in panel A) that contribute to the potentially long-lasting effects of climate risks. RKR-H assessment, for example, states that there is robust evidence that major armed conflicts routinely trigger mass displacement, threaten health and food security, and undermine economic activity and livelihoods, often with lasting negative consequences for living standards and socioeconomic development, therefore linking back to risks to living standards (RKR-D), human health (RKR-E) and food security (RKR-F).Interactions at the KR level (Figure 16.11, panel B)—panel B illustrates risk connections at the Key Risk level (Section 16.5.2.1) and as described in RKR assessments (Section 16.5.2.3). To only take one example here, risk to livelihoods and economies is influenced by the loss of ecosystem services (RKR-B) and the loss or breakdown of critical infrastructures (RKR-C), and it influences risks to human lives and health (RKR-E), food and water security (RKR-F, RKR-G), poverty (RKR-D) and peace and human mobility (RKR-H). As a third-order sequence, RKR assessments show that increased risk to peace and human mobility affects lives and health as well as food security, which in turn threaten livelihoods and economies. The above suggests that some vicious cycle effects play a central role in explaining impact processes. Cascading effects can indeed lead to cumulative risks that partly feed various drivers of the emergence of severe risks (Section 16.5.1), such as the acceleration of ecosystem degradation, or the reaching of thresholds and irreversible states in human systems at a decade-to-century time horizon (e.g., when permanent inundation questions the habitability of some low-lying coasts; RKR-A). The extent and duration of risk cascades are, however, expected to substantially vary depending on warming levels and development pathways, both separately (Section 16.5.3) and when combined (Sections 16.6.1, 16.6.2) (Figure 16.10).In addition, RKR assessments converge to suggest that regions that are already experiencing climate change impacts will experience severe impact cascades first (e.g., RKR-F), because they are in areas (i) that face development constraints and associated challenges such as poverty, inequity and social discrimination for example, and (ii) where climate change projections are the most intense for the next decades. That is especially a concern for Africa (RKR-F, RKR-G), Asia and Latin America (Chapters 9, 10, 12). RKR-E, for example, concludes that the likelihood of severe risks to human health is especially high for highly susceptible populations, particularly the poor and otherwise marginalised. RKR assessments, however, emphasise that middle- and high-income regions are also to be considered at serious risk because climate change is accelerating at the global level (IPCC, 2021), and because critical dimensions are exposed to severe risks such as major transportation (e.g., international airports) and energy (e.g., nuclear power plants) infrastructure for instance (RKR-C), and because of the interconnectedness of economies.Finally, all RKR assessments suggest that enhanced adaptation has the potential to contain such feedback effects and cascading processes more broadly, and reduce the duration of the impacts on the system as a whole. There are, however, knowledge gaps on such a potential, as well as on the nature of impact cascades (positive, negative, neutral, mixed).