IPCC’s recognition of the importance of regional climates can be traced back to its First Assessment Report (FAR; IPCC, 1990a), where climate projections for 2030 were presented for five sub-continental regions (see Section 1.3.6 for an assessment of those projections). In subsequent reports, there has been a growing emphasis on the analysis of regional climate, including two special reports: one on regional impacts (IPCC, 1998) and another on extreme events (SREX, IPCC, 2012). A general feature of previous IPCC reports is that the number and coverage of climate regions vary according to the subject and across Working Groups. Such varied definitions have the advantage of optimizing the results for a particular application (e.g., national boundaries are crucial for decision-making, but they rarely delimit distinctive climate regions), whereas variable definitions of regions may have the disadvantage of hindering multidisciplinary assessments and comparisons between studies or Working Groups.In this Report, regional climate change is primarily addressed through the introduction of four classes of regions (unless otherwise explicitly mentioned and justified). The first two are the unified WGI Reference Sets of (i) Land Regions and (ii) Ocean Regions, which are used throughout the Report. These are supplemented by additional sets of (iii) Typological Regions – used in Chapters 5, 8–12 and Atlas – and (iv) Continental Regions, which are mainly used for linking Chapters 11, 12 and Atlas with Working Group II (Figure 1.18). All four classes of regions are defined and described in detail in the Atlas. Here we summarize their basic features.Figure 1.18 | Main region types used in this report.  (a) AR6 WGI Reference Set of Land and Ocean Regions (Iturbide et al., 2020), consisting of 46 land regions and 15 ocean regions, including 3 hybrid regions (CAR, MED, SEA) that are both land and ocean regions. Abbreviations are explained to the right of the map. Notice that RAR, SPO, NPO and EPO extend beyond the 180º meridian, therefore appearing at both sides of the map (indicated by dashed lines). A comparison with the previous reference regions of AR5 WGI (IPCC, 2013a) is presented in the Atlas.  (b) Example of typological regions: monsoon domains (see Chapter 8). Abbreviations are explained to the right of the map. The black contour lines represent the global monsoon zones, while the coloured regions denote the regional monsoon domains. The two stippled regions (EqAmer and SAfri) do receive seasonal rainfall, but their classification as monsoon regions is still under discussion.  (c) Continental Regions used mainly in Chapter 12 and the Atlas. Stippled zones define areas that are assessed in both regions (e.g., the Caribbean is assessed as Small Islands and also as part of Central America). Small Islands are ocean regions containing small islands with consistent climate signals and/or climatological coherence. Open figureThe Reference Sets of Land and Ocean Regions are polygonal, sub-continental domains, defined through a combination of environmental, climatic and non-climatic (e.g., pragmatic, technical, historical) factors, in accordance with the literature and climatological reasoning based on observed and projected future climate. Merging the diverse functions and purposes of the regions assessed in the literature into a common reference set implies a certain degree of compromise between simplicity, practicality and climate consistency. For instance, Spain is fully included in the Mediterranean (MED) Reference Region, but is one of the most climatically diverse countries in the world. Likewise, a careful comparison of panels a and b of Figure 1.18 reveals that the simplified southern boundary of the Sahara (SAH) Reference Region slightly overlaps the northern boundary of the West African Monsoon Typological Region. As such, the resulting Reference Regions are not intended to precisely represent climates, but rather to provide simple domains suitable for regional synthesis of observed and modelled climate and climate change information (Iturbide et al., 2020). In particular, CMIP6 model results averaged over Reference Regions are presented in the Atlas.The starting point for defining the AR6 Reference Sets of Land Regions was the collection of 26 regions introduced in SREX (IPCC, 2012). The SREX collection was then revised, reshaped, complemented and optimized to reflect the recent scientific literature and observed climate-change trends, giving rise to the novel AR6 Reference Set of 46 Land Regions. Additionally, AR6 introduces a new Reference Set of 15 Ocean Regions (including 3 Hybrid Regions that are treated as both: land and ocean), which complete the coverage of the whole Earth (Iturbide et al., 2020).Particular aspects of regional climate change are described by specialized domains called Typological Regions (Figure 1.18b). These regions cover a wide range of spatial scales and are defined by specificfeatures, called typologies. Examples of typologies include: tropical forests, deserts, mountains, monsoon regions and megacities, among others. Typological Regions are powerful tools to summarize complex aspects of climate defined by a combination of multiple variables. For this reason, they are used in many chapters of AR6 WGI and WGII (e.g., Chapters 8–12 and Atlas).Finally, consistency with WGII is also pursued in Chapters 11, 12 and the Atlas through the use of a set of Continental Regions (Figure 1.18c), based on the nine continental domains defined in AR5 WGII Part B (Hewitson et al., 2014). These are classical geopolitical divisions of Africa, Asia, Australasia, Europe, North America, Central and South America, plus Small Islands, Polar Regions, and the Ocean. In AR6 WGI, five hybrid zones (Caribbean–Small Islands, East Europe–Asia, European Arctic, North American Arctic, and Northern Central America) are also identified, which are assessed in more than one Continental Region. Additional consistency with WGIII is pursued in Chapter 6 through the use of sub-continental domains which essentially form a subset of the Continental Set of Regions (Figure 1.18c and Section 6.1).