The above critical enablers and lessons learned from around the world establish a strong foundation for charting pathways for CRD in coastal C&S. These pathways will necessarily vary in different C&S, and synergies and commonalities within different coastal archetypes can be leveraged. Pivotal is recognition of the narrow window of time remaining to translate embryonic risk assessment and adaptation planning into concerted implementation efforts. C&S by the sea could be the centres of innovation that lead the way to advancing SDGs through to 2030 and CRD beyond this decade (see Section 2.1.1).This cross-chapter paper shows that a range of adaptation solutions, hard and soft protection, nature-based measures, accommodate, advance, retreat and behavioural change will need to be implemented as an integrated and sequenced portfolio of responses if coastal C&S are to contain the adverse risks of climate change (high confidence). The effectiveness and feasibility of any intervention—at any given moment—to reduce a particular climate-compounded coastal hazard risk or combination of risks depend upon the settlement archetype, including its geomorphological, cultural, economic, technical, institutional and political features, as well as on its historical development trajectory. Coastal C&S will benefit from developing flexible adaptation pathways—sequences of adaptation strategies and intervention options—to navigate a dynamic solution space that changes in response to climate and other drivers of change, and is also shaped by human development choices and socioeconomic, technological and institutional change.There is no silver bullet or panacea. But developing locally appropriate yet flexible pathways for CRD will help coastal communities to address escalating risks and uncertainty (Cross-Chapter Box DEEP in Chapter 17). Effective pathways are based on robust integrated information about dynamic coastal hazard risk and plausible interventions. However, their successful implementation requires multi-scale governance arrangements and practices able to bridge different administrative and sectoral capacities in the coastal zone; effective and accountable leadership; and inclusive decision-making arrangements to enable participation, manage conflicts and trade-offs, engender local ownership, and promote equity and justice in coastal adaptation plans and policies. Further, the feasibility of adaptation strategies and interventions, especially those entailing changing behaviours and practices, is increased by recognising and incorporating peoples’ values and beliefs and Indigenous and local knowledge systems, as well as the voices of women and vulnerable groups.Coastal C&S are on the frontline of observed climate change impacts and future risk (high confidence). Difficult choices will be made as climate- and ocean-driven extremes become more frequent. In the next few decades, many coastal regions and C&S will have the opportunity to take actions to avoid and reduce risk, through incremental as well as more transformative interventions. Under higher levels of global warming, decisions will need to be made faster or respond to higher levels of SLR (high confidence; Cross-Chapter Box SLR in Chapter 3). This is particularly challenging in coastal C&S characterised by the inertia and path dependency of development choices, with long lead times for adaptation planning and implementation, and the long design life and societal impact of many interventions. Given the risks assessed in coastal C&S, the scale of climate impacts globally will depend to a large extent on whether coastal settlements develop and implement pre-emptive and flexible adaptation pathways, and whether a significant and timely reduction in greenhouse gas emissions is achieved in C&S and globally  (high confidence). 