National policies on climate change, water protection, regulation and management laws are important focal areas of adaptation in the water sector (Section 4.7). Notable in the jurisdiction field is the Glacier Protection Law in place in Argentina (2010–2019) and under construction in Chile (since 2005). This first glacier law in the world represents a milestone for high-mountain conservation but is also criticised for hindering effective disaster risk adaptation measures and excluding local socioeconomic needs (Anacona et al., 2018). Furthermore, the first Framework Law on Climate Change was implemented in Peru (2018) and is under way in Colombia, Chile and Venezuela (Figure 12.13; Table SM12.6). Overarching regional institutions (e.g., OAS [2016])  and most countries in CSA promote a move towards more integrative and sustainable management of water resources through new legislation and financing mechanisms. For instance, new water laws that include principles of integrated water resource management (IWRM) have entered into force, for example, in Nicaragua (2007), Peru (2009), Ecuador (2014) and Costa Rica (2014), or are under way, such as in Colombia (since 2009). However, current realities in all regions show major challenges in implementing IWRM mechanisms and policies, related but not limited to political and institutional instabilities, governance structures, fragmented service provision, lack of economies of scale and scope, corruption and social conflicts (high confidence) (WWAP, 2020).Figure 12.13 | Overview map of observed glacier changes, associated impacts, adaptation and policy efforts across the Andes.  (a)  Selected impacts from glacier shrinkage. (b)  Selected adaptation efforts (see upper-right map for the location of each adaptation measure). (c)  Policies and glacier inventory: NDC = submission year(s) of Nationally Determined Contributions (u = update), CCL = climate change law, GLL = glacier law (i = initialised framework), INV = last national glacier inventory. The explicit mention of glaciers, snow and mountain ecosystems within each law/inventory is highlighted with the corresponding symbols (grey = has not come into force). (d)  Glacier area (km²) according to last national inventory. (e)  Glacier area change (%/year) according to baseline of last national inventory. (f)  Geodetic glacier mass balance in metres water equivalent per year (m w.e./year) and error estimate (±m w.e./year) retrieved from Dussaillant et al. (2019). nd = no data available. Further details can be found in the appendix in Table SM12.6.Open figure Many water-related conflicts in CSA are rooted in inequitable water governance that excludes water users from decisions on water allocation (high confidence) (Drenkhan et al., 2015; Vuille et al., 2018). In turn, inclusive water regimes leverage long-term adaptation planning. These have been addressed in some national strategies, such as in Brazil (Ministry of Environment of Brazil, 2016a). At the local level, a decentralised and participatory bottom-up water governance model was induced by civil society and research institutions to foster rainwater harvesting technologies reducing drought risk in semiarid Brazil (NES) (Lindoso et al., 2018).Water fund programmes can generate important co-benefits for sustainable development, contributing to improved governance and conservation of watershed systems in CSA. Nevertheless, only a few experiences have been evaluated as successful due to insufficient implementation, low decision-making ability of some stakeholder groups and poor evidence-based approaches (medium confidence) (Bremer et al., 2016; Leisher et al., 2019). Furthermore, financing mechanisms that produce incentives for sustainable water management have been promoted, tested or implemented. PES for water provision represents such an example and such mechanisms have been implemented across CSA since the 1990s (Grima et al., 2016).Only about 50–70% of required financial resources are currently allocated per year to meet the national targets in the water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) sector for the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6 agenda in several regions of CSA. This share drops down to less than 50% in NSA (Venezuela) and SES (Argentina, Uruguay, Paraguay), except for Panama in CA, which allocates more than 75% of the required financial resources. For the implementation of NbS, evidence suggests that the overall expenditure remains well below 1% of total investment in water resource management infrastructure (WWAP, 2018). These funding deficits set important limitations on future water provision, adaptation to changing water resources and the achievement of the SDGs by 2030 (high confidence) (WHO, 2017).