Enabling system transitions towards CRD is dependent in part on the ability to monitor and evaluate system transitions and broader development pathways to identify effective interventions and barriers to their implementation (very high confidence). However, the monitoring and evaluation of individual system transitions, much less CRD, remains highly challenging for multiple reasons (Persson, 2019). The highly contextual nature of resilience, adaptation and sustainable development means that, unlike climate mitigation, it is difficult to define universal metrics or targets for adaptation and resilience (Pringle and Leiter, 2018); (Brooks et al., 2014). This is demonstrated by the Paris Agreement’s global goal for adaptation, The mismatch between timescales associated with resilience and adaptation interventions and those over which the results of such interventions are expected to become apparent tends to result in a focus on the measurement of spending, outputs and short-term outcomes, rather than longer-term impacts (Brooks et al., 2014; Pringle and Leiter, 2018). The need to assess resilience and adaptation against a background of evolving climate hazards, and to link resilience and adaptation with development outcomes, present further methodological challenges (very high confidence) (Brooks et al., 2014).Currently, the ability to monitor different components of CRD are in various stages of maturity (very high confidence). Monitoring of the SDGs, for example, is a routine established practice at global and regional levels, and UNDP publishes annual updates on progress towards the SDGs (United Nations, 2021 ). For resilience, Brooks et al. (2014) identify three broad approaches to its measurement, each of which could offer potential mechanisms for monitoring progress towards CRD. One is a ‘hazards’ approach, in which resilience is described in terms of the magnitude of a particular hazard that can be accommodated by a system, useful in contexts where thresholds in climate and related parameters can be identified and linked with adverse impacts on human populations, infrastructure and other systems (Naylor et al., 2020). An ‘impacts’ approach is one in which resilience is measured in terms of actual or avoided impacts and is suited for tracking adaptation success in delivering CRD over longer timescales, for example at the national level (Brooks et al., 2014). Finally, a ‘systems’ approach is one where resilience is described in terms of the characteristics of a system using quantitative or qualitative indicators which are often associated with different ‘dimensions’ of resilience (Serfilippi and Ramnath, 2018; Saja et al., 2019). This allows measurement of key indicators that are proxies for resilience at regular intervals, even in the absence of significant climate hazards and associated disruptions (very high confidence) (Brooks et al., 2014) (see also Cross-Chapter Box ADAPT in Chapter 1). Similar criteria could be applied to evaluating adaptation options and their implementation as well as various interventions in pursuit of SDGs.