Chapter 3 takes a long-term perspective on climate change mitigation pathways. Its focus is on the implications of long-term targets for the required short- and medium-term system changes and associated greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. This focus dictates a more global view and on issues related to path-dependency and up-scaling of mitigation options necessary to achieve different emissions trajectories, including particularly deep mitigation pathways that require rapid and fundamental changes.Stabilising global average-temperature change requires reducing CO2 emissions to net zero. Thus, a central cross-cutting topic within the chapter is the timing of reaching net zero CO2 emissions and how a ‘balance between anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks’ could be achieved across time and space. This includes particularly the increasing body of literature since the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C (SR1.5) which focuses on net zero CO2 emissions pathways that avoid temperature overshoot and hence do not rely on net negative CO2 emissions. The chapter conducts a systematic assessment of the associated economic costs as well as the benefits of mitigation for other societal objectives, such as the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In addition, the chapter builds on SR1.5 and introduces a new conceptual framing for the assessment of possible social, economic, technical, political, and geophysical ‘feasibility’ concerns of alternative pathways, including the enabling conditions that would need to fall into place so that stringent climate goals become attainable.The structure of the chapter is as follows: Section 3.2 introduces different types of mitigation pathways as well as the available modelling. Section 3.3 explores different emissions trajectories given socio-economic uncertainties and consistent with different long-term climate outcomes. A central element in this section is the systematic categorisation of the scenario space according to key characteristics of the mitigation pathways (including e.g., global average-temperature change, socio-economic development, technology assumptions, etc.). In addition, the section introduces selected Illustrative Mitigation Pathways (IMPs) that are used across the whole report. Section 3.4 conducts a sectoral analysis of the mitigation pathways, assessing the pace and direction of systems changes across sectors. Among others, this section aims at the integration of the sectoral information across AR6 WGIII chapters through a comparative assessment of the sectoral dynamics in economy-wide systems models compared to the insights from bottom-up sectoral models (from Chapters 6 to 11). Section 3.5 focuses on the required timing of mitigation actions, and the implication of near-term choices for the attainability of a range of long-term climate goals. After having explored the underlying systems transitions and the required timing of the mitigation actions, Section 3.6 assesses the economic implications, mitigation costs and benefits; and Section 3.7 assesses related co-benefits, synergies, and possible trade-offs for sustainable development and other societal (non-climate) objectives. Section 3.8 assumes a central role in the chapter and introduces a multidimensional feasibility metric that permits the evaluation of mitigation pathways across a range of feasibility concerns. Finally, methods of the assessment and knowledge gaps are discussed in Section 3.9, followed by Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs).