Protection and restoration of natural and semi-natural ecosystems are key adaptation measures in view of the clear evidence that damage and degradation of ecosystems exacerbates the impacts of climate change on biodiversity and people (high confidence). Ecosystem services that are under threat from a combination of climate change and other anthropogenic pressures include climate change mitigation, flood risk management, food provisioning and water supply (high confidence). Adaptation strategies that treat climate, biodiversity and human society as coupled systems will be most effective. {2.3; Figure 2.1; 2.5.4; 2.6.2; 2.6.3; 2.6.7; Cross-Chapter Boxes NATURAL and ILLNESS in this chapter}A range of analyses have concluded that ~30–50% of Earth’s surface needs to be effectively conserved to maintain biodiversity and ecosystem services (high confidence). Climate change places additional stress on ecosystem integrity and functioning, adding urgency to taking action. Low-intensity sustainable management, including that performed by Indigenous Peoples, is an integral part of some protected areas, and can support effective adaptation and maintain ecosystem health. Food and fibre production in other areas will need to be efficient, sustainable and adapted to climate change to meet the needs of the human population. (high confidence) {Figure 2.1; 2.5.4; 2.6.2; 2.6.3; 2.6.7}Natural ecosystems can provide the storage and sequestration of carbon at the same time as providing multiple other ecosystem services, including EbA (high confidence), but there are risks of maladaptation and environmental damage from some approaches to land-based mitigation (high confidence). Plantation, single-species forests in areas which would not naturally support forest, including savanna, natural grasslands and temperate peatlands, and replacing native tropical forests on peat soils, have destroyed local biodiversity and created a range of problems regarding water supply, food supply, fire risk and GHG emissions. Large-scale deployment of bioenergy, including bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS) through dedicated herbaceous or woody bioenergy crops and non-native production forests, can damage ecosystems directly or through increasing competition for land, with substantial risks to biodiversity. {2.6.3, 2.6.5, 2.6.6, 2.6.7; Box 2.2; Cross-Chapter Box NATURAL in this chapter; CCP7.3.2; Cross-Working Group Box BIOECONOMY in Chapter 5}Terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and species are often less degraded on land managed by Indigenous Peoples and local communities than on other land (medium confidence)  . Involving indigenous and local institutions is a key element for developing successful adaptation strategies. IKLK includes a wide variety of resource-use practices and ecosystem stewardship strategies that conserve and enhance both wild and domestic biodiversity. {2.6.5; 2.6.7; Cross-Chapter Box NATURAL in this chapter; Chapter 15; Box 18.6; CCP2.4.1; CCP2.4.3; Box CCP7.1 }Increases in the frequency and severity of extreme events, that WGI has attributed to human greenhouse gas emissions, are compressing the timeline available for natural systems to adapt and also impeding our ability to identify, develop and implement solutions (medium confidence). There is now an urgent need to build resilience and assist recovery following extreme events. This, combined with long-term changes in baseline conditions, means that implementing adaptation and mitigation measures cannot be delayed if these are to be fully effective. {2.3; Cross-Chapter Box EXTREMES in this chapter}