Policymakers can set minimum performance standards or maximum emission content specifications through legislation to increase the use of low-GHG materials and products by mandating the adoption of low-GHG production and construction processes while requiring material and resource efficiency aspects.Construction of buildings represented 11% of energy and process-related CO2 emissions globally in 2018 (IEA and UNEP 2019 ). The share of embodied emissions in construction is increasing as building energy efficiency is improving and energy supply is decarbonised (Chastas et al. 2016). As a result, jurisdictions are increasingly considering new requirements in building codes to reduce embodied emissions. This is the case of France’s new building code which is shifting from a thermal regulation (RT 2012) to an environmental regulation (RE 2020) to include embodied GHG LCA metrics for encouraging use of low-GHG building materials (Ministère de la Transition écologique et solidaire 2018; Schwarz et al. 2020). The 2018 International Green Construction Code (IGCC) provides technical requirements that can be adopted by jurisdictions for encouraging low-GHG building construction, which also covers minimum longevity and durability of structural, building envelope, and hardscape materials (Art. 1001.3.2.3) (Celadyn 2014). Low-GHG building rating systems, such as LEEDs, are voluntary standards which include specific requirements on material resources in their rating scale. Trade-offs between energy performance achievement and material used in building construction needs to be further assessed and considered as low-GHG building code requirements develop. Local governments can also lead the way by adopting standards for construction. This is the case of the county of Marin in California which specifies maximum embodied carbon in kgCO2-eq m –3 and maximum ordinary Portland cement content in lbs/yd 3 for different levels of concrete compressive strength (Marin County 2021).Governments are also turning their attention to developing standards to increase the durability of products and materials by requiring options for maintenance, reparability, reusability, upgradability, recyclability and waste handling. For example, the EU Ecodesign Directive includes new requirements for manufacturers to make available for a minimum of seven to 10 years spare parts to repair household equipment (Talens Peiró et al. 2020; Calisto Friant et al. 2021; Nikolaou and Tsagarakis 2021). The European Commission plans to widen the resource efficiency requirements beyond energy-related products to cover products such as textiles and furniture as well as high-impact intermediary products such as steel, cement and chemicals in a new sustainable product policy legislative initiative. (Domenech and Bahn-Walkowiak 2019; Llorente-González and Vence 2019; European Commission 2020; Polverini 2021).Further research is needed to understand how different international and national frameworks, codes, and standards that focus on emissions can work in unison to amplify their mutually desired outcomes. Building performance and market instrument trading frameworks recognised globally do not always incentivise the same outcomes due to the differences in market approach. LCA metrics are a useful tool to help assess optimal options for ultimate emission reduction objectives (Röck et al. 2020; Shadram et al. 2020).