Effective climate action requires political commitment, well-aligned multi-level governance and institutional frameworks, laws, policies and strategies. It needs clear goals, adequate finance and financing tools, coordination across multiple policy domains, and inclusive governance processes. Many mitigation and adaptation policy instruments have been deployed successfully, and could support deep emissions reductions and climate resilience if scaled up and applied widely, depending on national circumstances. Adaptation and mitigation action benefits from drawing on diverse knowledge. (high confidence)  Effective climate governance enables mitigation and adaptation by providing overall direction based on national circumstances, setting targets and priorities, mainstreaming climate action across policy domains and levels, based on national circumstances and in the context of international cooperation. Effective governance enhances monitoring and evaluation and regulatory certainty, prioritising inclusive, transparent and equitable decision-making, and improves access to finance and technology (high confidence). These functions can be promoted by climate-relevant laws and plans, which are growing in number across sectors and regions, advancing mitigation outcomes and adaptation benefits (high confidence). Climate laws have been growing in number and have helped deliver mitigation and adaptation outcomes (medium confidence). {WGII SPM C.5, WGII SPM C.5.1, WGII SPM C5.4, WGII SPM C.5.6; WGIII SPM B.5.2, WGIII SPM E.3.1}Effective municipal, national and sub- national climate institutions, such as expert and co-ordinating bodies, enable co-produced, multi-scale decision-processes, build consensus for action among diverse interests, and inform strategy settings (high confidence). This requires adequate institutional capacity at all levels (high confidence). Vulnerabilities and climate risks are often reduced through carefully designed and implemented laws, policies, participatory processes, and interventions that address context specific inequities such as based on gender, ethnicity, disability, age, location and income. (high confidence). Policy support is influenced by Indigenous Peoples, businesses, and actors in civil society, including, youth, labour, media, and local communities, and effectiveness is enhanced by partnerships between many different groups in society (high confidence). Climate-related litigation is growing, with a large number of cases in some developed countries and with a much smaller number in some developing countries, and in some cases has influenced the outcome and ambition of climate governance (medium confidence). {WGII SPM C2.6, WGII SPM C.5.2, WGII SPM C.5.5, WGII SPM C.5.6, WGII SPM D.3.1; WGIII SPM E3.2, WGIII SPM E.3.3}Effective climate governance is enabled by inclusive decision processes, allocation of appropriate resources, and institutional review, monitoring and evaluation (high confidence)  . Multi-level, hybrid and cross-sector governance facilitates appropriate consideration for co-benefits and trade-offs, particularly in land sectors where decision processes range from farm level to national scale. (high confidence). Consideration of climate justice can help to facilitate shifting development pathways towards sustainability. {WGII SPM C.5.5, WGII SPM C.5.6, WGII SPM D.1.1, WGII SPM D.2, WGII SPM D.3.2; SRCCL SPM C.3, SRCCL TS.1}Drawing on diverse knowledge and partnerships, including with women, youth, Indigenous Peoples, local communities, and ethnic minorities can facilitate climate resilient development and has allowed locally appropriate and socially acceptable solutions (high confidence)  . {WGII SPM D.2, D.2.1}Many regulatory and economic instruments have already been deployed successfully. These instruments could support deep emissions reductions if scaled up and applied more widely . Practical experience has informed instrument design and helped to improve predictability, environmental effectiveness, economic efficiency, and equity. (high confidence). {WGII SPM E.4; WGIII SPM E.4.2}Scaling up and enhancing the use of regulatory instruments, consistent with national circumstances, can improve mitigation outcomes in sectoral applications (high confidence)  , and regulatory instruments that include flexibility mechanisms can reduce costs of cutting emissions (medium confidence)  . {WGII SPM C.5.4; WGIII SPME.4.1}Where implemented, carbon pricing instruments have incentivized low-cost emissions reduction measures, but have been less effective, on their own and at prevailing prices during the assessment period, to promote higher-cost measures necessary for further reductions (medium confidence). Revenue from carbon taxes or emissions trading can be used for equity and distributional goals, for example to support low-income households, among other approaches (high confidence). There is no consistent evidence that current emission trading systems have led to significant emissions leakage (medium confidence). {WGIII SPM E4.2, WGIII SPM E.4.6}.Removing fossil fuel subsidies would reduce emissions, improve public revenue and macroeconomic performance, and yield other environmental and sustainable development benefits such as improved public revenue, macroeconomic and sustainability performance; subsidy removal can have adverse distributional impacts especially on the most economically vulnerable groups which, in some cases, can be mitigated by measures such as re-distributing revenue saved, and depend on national circumstances (high confidence)  . Fossil fuel subsidy removal is projected by various studies to reduce global CO2 emissions by 1–4%, and GHG emissions by up to 10% by 2030, varying across regions (medium confidence). {WGIII SPM E.4.2}.National policies to support technology development, and participation in international markets for emission reduction, can bring positive spillover effects for other countries (medium confidence),  although reduced demand for fossil fuels as a result of climate policy could result in costs to exporting countries (high confidence). Economy-wide packages can meet short-term economic goals while reducing emissions and shifting development pathways towards sustainability (medium confidence). Examples are public spending commitments; pricing reforms; and investment in education and training, R&D and infrastructure (high confidence). Effective policy packages would be comprehensive in coverage, harnessed to a clear vision for change, balanced across objectives, aligned with specific technology and system needs, consistent in terms of design and tailored to national circumstances (high confidence). {WGIII SPM E4.4, WGIII SPM 4.5, WGIII SPM 4.6}