Clouds can be formed almost anywhere in the atmosphere when moist air parcels rise and cool, enabling the water vapour to condense. Clouds consist of liquid water droplets and/or ice crystals, and these droplets and crystals can grow into larger particles of rain, snow or drizzle. These microphysical processes interact with aerosols, radiation and atmospheric circulation, resulting in a highly complex set of processes governing cloud formation and life cycles that operate across a wide range of spatial and temporal scales.Clouds have various types, from optically thick convective clouds to thin stratus and cirrus clouds, depending upon thermodynamic conditions and large-scale circulation (Figure 7.9). Over the equatorial warm pool and inter-tropical convergence zone (ITCZ) regions, high SSTs stimulate the development of deep convective cloud systems, which are accompanied by anvil and cirrus clouds near the tropopause where the convective air outflows. The large-scale circulation associated with these convective clouds leads to subsidence over the subtropical cool ocean, where deep convection is suppressed by a lower tropospheric inversion layer maintained by the subsidence and promoting the formation of shallow cumulus and stratocumulus clouds. In the extratropics, mid-latitude storm tracks control cloud formation, which occurs primarily in the frontal bands of extratropical cyclones. Since liquid droplets do not freeze spontaneously at temperatures warmer than approximately –40°C and ice nucleating particles that can aid freezing at warmer temperatures are scarce (see (Section 7.3.3), extratropical clouds often consist both of super-cooled liquid and ice crystals, resulting in mixed-phase clouds.Figure 7.9  | Schematic cross section of diverse cloud responses to surface warming from the tropics to polar regions.  Thick solid and dashed curves indicate the tropopause and the subtropical inversion layer in the current climate, respectively. Thin grey text and arrows represent robust responses in the thermodynamic structure to greenhouse warming, of relevance to cloud changes. Text and arrows in red, orange and green show the major cloud responses assessed with  high, medium and low confidence, respectively, and the sign of their feedbacks to the surface warming is indicated in the parenthesis. Major advances since AR5 are listed in the box. Figure adapted from Boucher et al. (2013). Open figureIn the global energy budget at TOA, clouds affect shortwave (SW) radiation by reflecting sunlight due to their high albedo (cooling the climate system) and also longwave (LW) radiation by absorbing the energy from the surface and emitting at a lower temperature to space, that is, contributing to the greenhouse effect, warming the climate system. In general, the greenhouse effect of clouds strengthens with height whereas the SW reflection depends on the cloud optical properties. The effects of clouds on Earth’s energy budget are measured by the cloud radiative effect (CRE), which is the difference in the TOA radiation between clear and all skies (see (Section 7.2.1). In the present climate, the SW CRE tends to be compensated by the LW CRE over the equatorial warm pool, leading to the net CRE pattern showing large negative values over the eastern part of the subtropical ocean and the extratropical ocean due to the dominant influence of highly reflective marine low-clouds.In a first attempt to systematically evaluate equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS) based on fully coupled general circulation models (GCMs) in AR4, diverging cloud feedbacks were recognized as a dominant source of uncertainty. An advance in understanding the cloud feedback was to assess feedbacks separately for different cloud regimes (Gettelman and Sherwood, 2016). A thorough assessment of cloud feedbacks in different cloud regimes was carried out in AR5 (Boucher et al., 2013), which assigned  high or medium confidence for some cloud feedbacks butlow or  no  confidence for others (Table 7.9). Many studies that estimate the net cloud feedback using CMIP5 simulations (Vial et al., 2013; Caldwell et al., 2016; Zelinka et al., 2016; Colman and Hanson, 2017) show different values depending on the methodology and the set of models used, but often report a large inter-model spread of the feedback, with the 90% confidence interval spanning both weak negative and strong positive net feedbacks. Part of this diversity arises from the dependence of the model cloud feedbacks on the parametrization of clouds and their coupling to other sub-grid-scale processes (Zhao et al., 2015).Since AR5, community efforts have been undertaken to understand and quantify the cloud feedbacks in various cloud regimes coupled with large-scale atmospheric circulation (Bony et al., 2015). For some cloud regimes, alternative tools to ESMs, such as observations, theory, high-resolution cloud resolving models (CRMs), and large eddy simulations (LES), help quantify the feedbacks. Consequently, the net cloud feedback derived from ESMs has been revised by assessing the regional cloud feedbacks separately and summing them with weighting by the ratio of fractional coverage of those clouds over the globe to give the global feedback, following an approach adopted in Sherwood et al. (2020). This ‘bottom-up’ assessment is explained below with a summary of updated confidence of individual cloud feedback components (Table 7.9). Dependence of cloud feedbacks on evolving patterns of surface warming will be discussed in (Section 7.4.4 and is not explicitly taken into account in the assessment presented in this section.