The current generation of climate models do not fully resolve many of the components required to close the observed sea level budget, such as glaciers, ice sheets and land water storage (see Section 9.6 and Box 9.1). Consequently, most CMIP-based analyses of sea level change have focused on thermosteric sea level changes (i.e., thermal expansion due to warming) and ocean dynamic sea level change, both of which are simulated in the CMIP5-generation of models. The improved agreement between modelled thermal expansion and observed estimates during the historical period led the SROCC to assess a high confidence level in the simulated thermal expansion using climate models and  high confidence in their ability to project future thermal expansion.Since CMIP5 models do not include all necessary components of sea level change, this gap has been bridged by using offline models (for glacier melt and ice-sheet surface mass balance) driven by reanalyses and model output. Some studies have used offline mass inputs to account for dynamic ice-sheet and terrestrial contributions. Slangen et al. (2017) and Meyssignac et al. (2017) suggested including corrections to several contributions to sea level changes including to the Greenland surface mass balance and glacier contributions, based on differences between CMIP5-driven model results and reanalysis-driven results. This helps close the gap between models and observations for the 20th century globally, as well as providing better agreement with tide gauge observations in terms of interannual and multi-decadal variability at the regional scale.In CMIP6, ice sheets (see Sections 3.4.3.2 and 9.4) are included for the first time in ISMIP6 (Nowicki et al., 2016). There is also scope for new insights into terrestrial water contributions from land surface (and sub-surface) modelling in the Land Surface, Snow and Soil moisture Model Intercomparison Project (LS3MIP; van den Hurk et al., 2016). In parallel, the GlacierMIP project (Hock et al., 2019a; Marzeion et al., 2020; see Sections 3.4.3.1 and 9.5) is also underway, and has provided more quantitative guidance and a comprehensive assessment of the uncertainties and best estimates of the current and future contributions of glaciers to the sea level budget.