The feasibility, effectiveness and benefits of mitigation and adaptation actions are increased when multi-sectoral solutions are undertaken that cut across systems. When such options are combined with broader sustainable development objectives, they can yield greater benefits for human well-being, social equity and justice, and ecosystem and planetary health. (high confidence)  Climate resilient development strategies that treat climate, ecosystems and biodiversity, and human society as parts of an integrated system are the most effective (high confidence)  . Human and ecosystem vulnerability are interdependent (high confidence). Climate resilient development is enabled when decision-making processes and actions are integrated across sectors. (very high confidence). Synergies with and progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals enhance prospects for climate resilient development. Choices and actions that treat humans and ecosystems as an integrated system build on diverse knowledge about climate risk, equitable, just and inclusive approaches, and ecosystem stewardship. {WGII SPM B.2, WGII Figure SPM.5, WGII SPM D.2, WGII SPM D2.1, WGII SPM 2.2, WGII SPM D4, WGII SPM D4.1, WGII SPM D4.2, WGII SPM D5.2, WGII Figure SPM.5}Approaches that align goals and actions across sectors provide opportunities for multiple and large-scale benefits and avoided damages in the near term. Such measures can also achieve greater benefits through cascading effects across sectors (medium confidence)  . For example, the feasibility of using land for both agriculture and centralised solar production can increase when such options are combined (high confidence). Similarly, integrated transport and energy infrastructure planning and operations can together reduce the environmental, social, and economic impacts of decarbonising the transport and energy sectors (high confidence). The implementation of packages of multiple city-scale mitigation strategies can have cascading effects across sectors and reduce GHG emissions both within and outside a city’s administrative boundaries (very high confidence). Integrated design approaches to the construction and retrofit of buildings provide increasing examples of zero energy or zero carbon buildings in several regions. To minimise maladaptation, multi-sectoral, multi-actor and inclusive planning with flexible pathways encourages low-regret and timely actions that keep options open, ensure benefits in multiple sectors and systems and suggest the available solution space for adapting to long-term climate change. (very high confidence). Trade-offs in terms of employment, water use, land-use competition and biodiversity, as well as access to, and the affordability of, energy, food, and water can be avoided by well-implemented land-based mitigation options, especially those that do not threaten existing sustainable land uses and land rights, with frameworks for integrated policy implementation (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.2, WGII SPM C.4.4; WGIII SPM C.6.3, WGIII SPM C.6, WGIII SPM C.7.2, WGIII SPM C.8.5, WGIII SPM D.1.2, WGIII SPM D.1.5, WGIII SPM E.1.2}Mitigation and adaptation when implemented together, and combined with broader sustainable development objectives, would yield multiple benefits for human well-being as well as ecosystem and planetary health (high confidence)  . The range of such positive interactions is significant in the landscape of near-term climate policies across regions, sectors and systems. For example, AFOLU mitigation actions in land-use change and forestry, when sustainably implemented, can provide large-scale GHG emission reductions and removals that simultaneously benefit biodiversity, food security, wood supply and other ecosystem services but cannot fully compensate for delayed mitigation action in other sectors. Adaptation measures in land, ocean and ecosystems similarly can have widespread benefits for food security, nutrition, health and well-being, ecosystems and biodiversity. Equally, urban systems are critical, interconnected sites for climate resilient development; urban policies that implement multiple interventions can yield adaptation or mitigation gains with equity and human well-being. Integrated policy packages can improve the ability to integrate considerations of equity, gender equality and justice. Coordinated cross-sectoral policies and planning can maximise synergies and avoid or reduce trade-offs between mitigation and adaptation. Effective action in all of the above areas will require near-term political commitment and follow-through, social cooperation, finance, and more integrated cross-sectoral policies and support and actions. (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.1, WGII SPM C.2, WGII SPM C.2, WGII SPM C.5, WGII SPM D.2, WGII SPM D.3.2, WGII SPM D.3.3, WGII Figure SPM.4; WGIII SPM C.6.3, WGIII SPM C.8.2, WGIII SPM C.9, WGIII SPM C.9.1, WGIII SPM C.9.2, WGIII SPM D.2, WGIII SPM D.2.4, WGIII SPM D.3.2, WGIII SPM E.1, WGIII SPM E.2.4, WGIII Figure SPM.8, WGIII TS.7, WGIII TS Figure TS.29: SRCCL ES 7.4.8, SRCCL SPM B.6} (3.4, 4.4)