A tipping point is a threshold beyond which an abrupt or rapid change in a system occurs. Tipping points that have already been reached in ocean systems include the melting of sea ice in the Arctic, thermal bleaching of tropical coral reefs and the loss of kelp forests. Human-induced climate change will continue to force ecosystems into abrupt and often irreversible change, without strong mitigation and adaptation action. Figure FAQ3.3.1 | Global map with examples of tipping points that have been passed in ocean systems around the world. Tipping points in ecological systems are linked to increasing impacts and vulnerability of dependent human communities. SES: semi-enclosed sea; EBUS: eastern boundary upwelling system; CBC; coastal boundary current.Open figure A gradual change in water temperature or oxygen concentration can lead to a fundamental shift in the structure and/or composition of an ecosystem when a tipping point is exceeded. For example, all species have upper temperature limits below which they can thrive. In the tropics, prolonged warm temperatures can cause fatal ‘bleaching’ of tropical corals, leading reef ecosystems to degrade and become dominated by algae. In temperate regions, MHWs can kill or reduce the growth of kelp, threatening the other species that depend on the tall, canopy-forming marine plants for habitat. In the Arctic, rising temperatures are melting sea ice and reducing the available habitat for communities of ice-dependent species.Once a tipping point is passed, the effects can be long-lasting and/or irreversible over time scales of decades or longer. An ecosystem or a population can remain in the new state, even if the driver of the change returns to previous levels. For example, once a coral reef has been affected by bleaching, it can take decades for corals to grow back, even if temperatures remain below the bleaching threshold. Crossing a tipping point can cause entire populations to collapse, causing local extinctions.Tipping points are widespread across oceanic provinces and their ecosystems for climate variables like water temperature, oxygen concentration and acidification. Evidence suggests that ocean tipping points are being surpassed more frequently as the climate changes; scientists have estimated that abrupt shifts in communities of marine species occurred over 14% of the ocean in 2015, up from 0.25% of the ocean in the 1980s. Other human stressors to the ocean, including habitat destruction, overfishing, pollution and the spread of diseases, combine with climate change to push marine systems beyond tipping points. As an example, nutrient pollution from land together with climate change can lead to low-oxygen coastal areas referred to as ‘dead zones’.Box FAQ 3.3Human communities can also experience tipping points that alter people’s relationships with marine ecosystem services. Indigenous Peoples and local communities may be forced to move from a particular location due to SLR, erosion or loss of marine resources. Current activities that help sustain Indigenous Peoples and their cultures may no longer be possible in the coming decades, and traditional diets or territories may have to be abandoned. These tipping points have implications for physical and mental health of marine-dependent human communities.Adaptation solutions to the effects of ecological tipping points are rarely able to reverse their environmental impacts, and instead often require human communities to transform their livelihoods in different ways. Examples include diversifying income by shifting from fishing to tourism and relocating communities threatened by flooding to other areas to continue their livelihoods. Tipping points are being passed already in coral reefs and polar systems, and more will probably be reached in the near future given climate-change projections. Nevertheless, the chances of moving beyond additional tipping points in the future will be minimised if we reduce greenhouse gas emissions and we also act to limit other human impacts on the ocean, such as overfishing and nutrient pollution.