Modifications of Earth’s energy budget by anthropogenic radiative forcings drive substantial and widespread changes in the global water cycle. There is  high confidence that global mean precipitation and evaporation increase with global warming, but the estimated rate is model-dependent (very likely range of 1–3% per 1°C). The global increase in precipitation is determined by a robust response to global mean surface air temperature (very likely 2–3% per 1°C) that is partly offset by fast atmospheric adjustments to atmospheric heating by greenhouse gases and aerosols. The overall effect of anthropogenic aerosols is to reduce global precipitation and alter large-scale atmospheric circulation patterns through their well-understood surface radiative cooling effect (high confidence). Land-use and land-cover changes also drive regional water cycle changes through their influence on surface water and energy budgets (high confidence). {8.2.1, 8.2.3.4, 8.2.2.2, Box 8.1}A warmer climate increases moisture transport into weather systems, which, on average, makes wet seasons and events wetter (high confidence). An increase in near-surface atmospheric water holding capacity of about 7% per 1°C of warming explains a similar magnitude of intensification of heavy precipitation events (from sub-daily up to seasonal time scales) that increases the severity of flood hazards when these extremes occur (high confidence). The severity of very wet and very dry events increases in a warming climate (high confidence), but changes in atmospheric circulation patterns alter where and how often these extremes occur, with substantial regional differences and seasonal contrasts. A slowdown of tropical circulation with global warming partly offsets the warming-induced strengthening of precipitation in monsoon regions (high confidence). {8.2.2, 8.2.3, 8.3.1.7, 8.4.1, 8.5.1}Warming over land drives an increase in atmospheric evaporative demand and the severity of droughts (high confidence). Greater warming over land than over the ocean alters atmospheric circulation patterns and, on average, reduces continental near-surface relative humidity, which contributes to regional drying (high confidence). Increasing atmospheric CO2 concentrations increase plant growth and water-use efficiency, but there is low confidence in how these factors drive regional water cycle changes. {8.2.2, 8.2.3}