Idealized ‘pulse’ removal Earth system model simulations are useful for understanding the carbon cycle response to CDR. Figure 5.32 illustrates the response of atmospheric CO2, land and ocean carbon sinks to an instantaneous CO2 removal applied from a pre-industrial equilibrium state. Following CO2 removal from the atmosphere, the atmospheric CO2 concentration declines rapidly at first and then rebounds (Figure 5.32a). This rebound is due to CO2 release by the terrestrial biosphere and the ocean in response to declining atmospheric CO2 levels (Figure 5.32b,c; M. Collins et al., 2013). For the model simulations shown in Figure 5.32, 23 ± 6% (mean ± 1 standard deviation) of the 100 PgC removed remains out of the atmosphere 80–100 years after the instantaneous removal. The remainder is offset by CO2 outgassing from the land (49 ± 12%) and ocean (29 ± 7%). While the direction of the CO2 flux is robust across models, the relative contribution of the outgassing from land and ocean reservoirs to the atmospheric CO2 rebound after removal varies. These results corroborate the  high confidence placed by AR5 WGI (Chapter 6) on the partial compensation of CO2 removal from the atmosphere by CO2 outgassing from the land and ocean. Due to disagreement between models, the magnitude of this outgassing and the relative contribution of land and ocean fluxes remains low confidence.Figure 5.32 | Carbon cycle response to instantaneous carbon dioxide (CO2 ) removal from the atmosphere.  (a) Atmospheric CO2 concentration;  (b) change in land carbon reservoir;  (c) change in ocean carbon reservoir. Results are shown for simulations with seven CMIP6 Earth system models and the University of Victoria Earth System Climate Model (UVic ESCM) of intermediate complexity forced with 100 PgC instantaneously removed from the atmosphere. The ‘pulse’ removal is applied from a model state in equilibrium with a pre-industrial atmospheric CO2 concentration (CDRMIP experiment CDR-pi-pulse; Keller et al., 2018b). Changes in land and ocean carbon reservoirs are calculated relative to a pre-industrial control simulation. Data for the UVic ESCM is from Zickfeld et al. (2021). Further details on data sources and processing are available in the chapter data table (Table 5.SM.6). Open figure