In AR6, ‘climate information’ refers to specific information about the past, current or future state of the climate system that is relevant for mitigation, adaptation and risk management. Cross-Chapter Box 1.1 is an example of climate information at the global scale. It provides climate change information with potential relevance for the global stocktake, and indicates where in AR6 this information may be found.Responding to national and regional policymakers’ needs for tailored information relevant to risk assessment and adaptation, AR6 emphasizes assessment of regional information more than earlier reports. Here the phrase ‘regional climate information’ refers to predefined reference sets of land and ocean regions; various typological domains (such as mountains or monsoons); temporal frames including baseline periods as well as near term (2021–2040), medium term (2041–2060) and long term (2081–2100); and global warming levels (Chapters 10 and 12, Sections 1.4.1 and 1.4.5, and Atlas). Regional climate change information is constructed from multiple lines of evidence including observations, paleoclimate proxies, reanalyses, attribution of changes and climate model projections from both global and regional climate models (Sections 1.5.3 and 10.2–10.4). The constructed regional information needs to take account of user context and values for risk assessment, adaptation and policy decisions (Sections 1.2.3 and 10.5).As detailed in Chapter 10, scientific climate information often requires ‘tailoring’ to meet the requirements of specific decision-making contexts. In a study of the UK Climate Projections 2009 (UKCP09) project, researchers concluded that climate scientists struggled to grasp and respond to users’ information needs because they lacked experience interacting with users, institutions and scientific idioms outside the climate science domain (Porter and Dessai, 2017). Economic theory predicts the value of ‘polycentric’ approaches to climate change informed by specific global, regional and local knowledge and experience (Ostrom, 1996, 2012). This is confirmed by numerous case studies of extended, iterative dialogue among scientists, policymakers, resource managers and other stakeholders to produce mutually understandable, usable, task-related information and knowledge, policymaking and resource management around the world (Lemos and Morehouse, 2005; Lemos et al., 2012, 2014, 2018; see Vaughan and Dessai, 2014 for a critical view). The SR1.5 (2018) assessed that ‘education, information, and community approaches, including those that are informed by indigenous knowledge and local knowledge, can accelerate the wide-scale behaviour changes consistent with adapting to and limiting global warming to 1.5°C. These approaches are more effective when combined with other policies and tailored to the motivations, capabilities and resources of specific actors and contexts (high confidence).’ These extended dialogic co-production and education processes have thus been demonstrated to improve the quality of both scientific information and governance (high confidence) (Section 10.5 and Cross Chapter Box 12.2).Since AR5, climate services have increased at multiple levels (local, national, regional and global) to aid decision-making of individuals and organizations and to enable preparedness and early climate change action. These services include appropriate engagement from users and providers, are based on scientifically credible information and producer and user expertise, have an effective access mechanism, and respond to the users’ needs (Glossary; Hewitt et al., 2012). A Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS) was established in 2009 by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) in support of these efforts (Hewitt et al., 2012; Lúcio and Grasso, 2016). Climate services are provided across sectors and time scales, from sub-seasonal to multi-decadal, and support co-design and co-production processes that involve climate information providers, resource managers, planners, practitioners and decision makers (Brasseur and Gallardo, 2016; Trenberth et al., 2016; C.D. Hewitt et al., 2017). For example, they may provide high-quality data on temperature, rainfall, wind, soil moisture and ocean conditions, as well as maps, risk and vulnerability analyses, assessments, and future projections and scenarios. These data and information products may be combined with non-meteorological data, such as agricultural production, health trends, population distributions in high-risk areas, road and infrastructure maps for the delivery of goods, and other socio-economic variables, depending on users’ needs (WMO, 2020a). Cross-Chapter Box 12.2 illustrates the diversity of climate services with three examples from very different contexts.The current landscapeof climate services is assessed in detail in Chapter 12 (Section 12.6), with a focus on multi-decadal time scales relevant for climate change risk assessment. Other information relevant to improving climate services for decision-making includes the assessment of methods to construct regional information (Chapter 10), as well as projections at the regional level (Atlas) relevant for impact and risk assessment in different sectors (Chapter 12).