General-purpose technologies (GPTs) provide solutions that could be applied across sectors and industries (Goldfarb 2011) by creating technological platforms for a growing number of interrelated innovations. Examples of GPTs relevant to climate change mitigation are hydrogen and fuel cell technology, which may find applications in transport, industry and distributed generation (Hanley et al. 2018), and nanotechnology which played a significant role in advancement of all the different types of renewable energy options (Hussein 2015). Assessing the environmental, social and economic implications of such technologies, including increased emissions through energy use, is challenging (Section 5.3.4.1 and Cross-Chapter Box 11 in this chapter).Several GPTs relevant for climate mitigation and adaptation emerged as a result of digitalisation, namely the adoption or increase in the use of information and communication technologies (ICTs) by citizens, organisations, industries or countries, and the associated restructuring of several domains of social life and of the economy around digital technologies and infrastructures (Brennen and Kreiss 2016; IEA 2017b). The digital revolution is underpinned by innovation in key technologies, for example, ubiquitous connected consumer devices such as mobile phones (Grubler et al. 2018), rapid expansions of global internet infrastructure and access (World Bank 2014), and steep cost reductions and performance improvements in computing devices, sensors, and digital communication technologies (Verma et al. 2020). The increasing pace at which the physical and digital worlds are converging increases the relevance of disruptive digitalisation in the context of climate mitigation and sustainability challenges (European Commission 2020) (Cross-Chapter Box 11 in this chapter and Chapter 4, Section 4.4.1).Digital technologies require energy, but increase efficiency, potentially offering technology-specific greenhouse gas (GHG) emission savings; they also have larger system-wide impacts (Kaack et al. 2021). In industrial sectors, robotisation, smart manufacturing (SM), internet of things (IoT), artificial intelligence (AI), and additive manufacturing (AM or 3D printing) have the potential to reduce material demand and promote energy management (Section 11.3.4.2). Smart mobility is changing transport demand and efficiency (Section 10.2.3). Smart devices in buildings, the deployment of smart grids and the provision of renewable energy increase the role of demand-side management (Serrenho and Bertoldi 2019) (Sections 9.4 and 9.5), and support the shift away from asset redundancy (Section 6.4.3). Digital solutions are equally important on the supply side, for example, by accelerating innovation with simulations and deep learning (Rolnick et al. 2021) or realising flexible and decentralised opportunities through energy-as-a-service concepts and particularly with pay-as-you-go (Section 15.6.8).Yet, increased digitalisation could increase energy demand, thus wiping away potential efficiency benefits, unless appropriately governed (IPCC 2018a). Moreover, digital technologies could negatively impact labour demand and increase inequality (Cross-Chapter Box 11 in this chapter).