A digitalised energy system can significantly reduce energy infrastructure investments while enhancing supply security and resilience ( high confidence) (Andoni et al. 2019; Strbac et al. 2020). Significant progress has been made in the development of technologies essential for the transition to a digitalised energy control paradigm, although the full implementation is still under development. Electrification and the increased integration of the electricity system with other systems will fundamentally transform the operational and planning paradigm of future energy infrastructure. A fully intelligent and sophisticated coordination of the multiple systems through smart control will support this paradigm shift. This shift will provide significant savings through better utilisation of existing infrastructure locally, regionally, nationally, and internationally. Supply system reliability will be enhanced through advanced control of local infrastructure (Strbac et al. 2015a). Furthermore, this paradigm shift offers the potential to increase energy efficiency through a combination of technologies that gather and analyse data and consequently optimise energy use in real-time.The transition to advanced data-driven control of energy system operations (Cremer et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2019a) will require advanced information and communication technologies and infrastructure, including the internet, wireless networks, computers, software, middleware, smart sensors, internet of things components, and dedicated technological developments (Hossein Motlagh et al. 2020). The transition will raise standardisation and cyber-security issues, given that digitalisation can become a single point of failure for the complete system (Ustun and Hussain 2019; Unsal et al. 2021). Implementing peer-to-peer energy trading based on blockchain is expected to be one of the key elements of next-generation electricity systems (Qiu et al. 2021). This trading will enable consumers to drive system operation and future design, increasing overall system efficiency and security of supply while reducing emissions without sacrificing users’ privacy (Andoni et al. 2019; Ahl et al. 2020). When deployed with smart contracts, this concept will be suitable for energy systems involving many participants, where a prerequisite is digitalisation (e.g., smart meters, end-use demand control systems) (Juhar and Khaled 2018; Teufel et al. 2019).