Aviation’s net warming effect results from its historical and current emissions of CO2, and non-CO2 emissions of water vapour, soot, sulphur dioxide (from sulphur in the fuel), and nitrogen oxides (NOx, = NO + NO2) (IPCC 1999; Lee et al. 2021; Szopa et al. 2021). Although the effective radiative forcing (ERF) of CO2 from historic aviation emissions is not currently the largest forcing term, it is difficult to address because of the sector’s current dependency on fossil-based hydrocarbon fuels and the longevity of CO2. A residual of emissions of CO2 today will still have a warming effect in many thousands of years (Archer et al. 2009; Canadell et al. 2021) whereas water vapour, soot, and NOx emissions will have long ceased to contribute to warming after some decades. As a result, CO2 mitigation of aviation to net zero levels, as required in 1.5°C scenarios, requires fundamental shifts in technology, fuel types, or changes of behaviour or demand.The non-CO2 effects of aviation on climate fall into the category of short-lived climate forcers (SLCFs). Emissions of NOx currently result in net positive warming from the formation of short-term ozone (warming) and the destruction of ambient methane (cooling). If the conditions are suitable, emissions of soot and water vapour can trigger the formation of contrails (Kärcher 2018), which can spread to form extensive contrail-cirrus cloud coverage. Such cloud coverage is estimated to have a combined ERF that is about 57% of the current net ERF of global aviation (Lee et al. 2021), although a comparison of cirrus cloud observations under pre- and post-COVID-19 pandemic conditions suggest that this forcing could be smaller (Digby et al. 2021). Additional effects from aviation from aerosol-cloud interactions on high-level ice clouds through soot (Chen and Gettelman 2013; Zhou and Penner 2014; Penner et al. 2018), and lower-level warm clouds through sulphur (Righi et al. 2013; Kapadia et al. 2016) are highly uncertain, with no best estimates available (Lee et al. 2021). In total, the net ERF from aviation’s non-CO2 SLCFs is estimated to be approximately 66% of aviation’s current total forcing. It is important to note that the fraction of non-CO2 forcing to total forcing is not a fixed quantity and is dependent on the recent history of growth (or otherwise) of CO2 emissions (Klöwer et al. 2021). The non-CO2 effects from aviation are the subject of discussion for mitigation options (Arrowsmith et al. 2020). However, the issues are complex, potentially involving technological and operational trade-offs with CO2.