Forest certification programs, such as Forest Sustainability Council (FSC) or Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification (PEFC), are consumer driven, voluntary programmes that influence timber harvesting practices, and may reduce emissions from forest degradation with reduced impact logging and other approaches (medium confidence). Forest certification has expanded globally to over 440 Mha (Kraxner et al. 2017). As the area of land devoted to certification has increased, the amount of timber produced from certified land has increased. In 2018, FSC accounted for harvests of 427 million m 3 and jointly FSC and PEFC accounted for 689 million m 3 in 2016 or around 40% of total industrial wood production (FAO 2018c). There is evidence that reduced impact logging can reduce carbon losses in tropical regions (Pearson et al. 2014; Ellis et al. 2019). However, there is conflicting evidence about whether forest certification reduces deforestation (e.g., Blackman et al. 2018; Tritsch et al. 2020).Supply chain management  in the food sector encourages more widespread use of conservation measures in agriculture ( high confidence). The number of private commitments to reduce deforestation from supply chains has greatly increased in recent years, with at least 865 public commitments by 447 producers, processors, traders, manufacturers and retailers as of December, 2020 (New York Declaration on Forests 2021). Industry partnerships with NGOs, such as the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO), have become more widespread and visible in agricultural production. For example, RSPO certifies members all along the supply chain for palm oil and claims around 19% of total production. Similar sustainability efforts exist for many of the world’s major agricultural products, including soybeans, rice, sugar cane, and cattle.There is evidence that the Amazon Soy Moratorium (ASM), an industry-NGO effort whereby large industry consumers agreed voluntarily not to purchase soybeans grown on land deforested after 2006, reduced deforestation in the legal Amazon (Nepstad et al. 2014; Gibbs et al. 2015). However, recent studies have shown that some deforestation from the Amazon was displaced to the Cerrado (Brazilian savannas) region (Moffette and Gibbs 2021), which is a global hotspot for biodiversity, and has significant carbon stocks. These results illustrate the importance of broadening the scope of supply chain management to minimise or eliminate displacement (Lima et al. 2019). In addition, while voluntary efforts may improve environmental outcomes for a time, it is not clear that they are sufficient to deliver long-term reductions in deforestation, given the increases in deforestation that have occurred in the Amazon in recent years (Box 7.9). Voluntary efforts would be more effective at slowing deforestation if they present stronger linkages to regulatory or other approaches (Lambin et al. 2018).