International cooperation is a critical enabler for achieving ambitious climate change mitigation goals and climate resilient development (high confidence). Climate resilient development is enabled by increased international cooperation including mobilising and enhancing access to finance, particularly for developing countries, vulnerable regions, sectors and groups and aligning finance flows for climate action to be consistent with ambition levels and funding needs (high confidence). While agreed processes and goals, such as those in the UNFCCC, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement, are helping (Section 2.2.1), international financial, technology and capacity building support to developing countries will enable greater implementation and more ambitious actions (medium confidence). By integrating equity and climate justice, national and international policies can help to facilitate shifting development pathways towards sustainability, especially by mobilising and enhancing access to finance for vulnerable regions, sectors and communities (high confidence). International cooperation and coordination, including combined policy packages, may be particularly important for sustainability transitions in emissions-intensive and highly traded basic materials industries that are exposed to international competition. (high confidence). The large majority of emission modelling studies assume significant international cooperation to secure financial flows and address inequality and poverty issues in pathways limiting global warming. There are large variations in the modelled effects of mitigation on GDP across regions, depending notably on economic structure, regional emissions reductions, policy design and level of international cooperation (high confidence). Delayed global cooperation increases policy costs across regions (high confidence). {WGII SPM D.2, WGII SPM D.3.1, WGII SPM D.5.2; WGIII SPM D.3.4, WGIII SPM C5.4, WGIII SPM C.12.2, WGIII SPM E.6, WGIII SPM E.6.1, WGIII E.5.4, WGIII TS.4.2, WGIII TS.6.2; SR1.5 SPM D.6.3, SR1.5 SPM D.7, SR1.5 SPM D.7.3}The transboundary nature of many climate change risks (e.g., for supply chains, markets and natural resource flows in food, fisheries, energy and water, and potential for conflict) increases the need for climate-informed transboundary management, cooperation, responses and solutions through multi- national or regional governance processes (high confidence). Multilateral governance efforts can help reconcile contested interests, world views and values about how to address climate change. International environment and sectoral agreements, and initiatives in some cases, may help to stimulate low GHG investment and reduce emissions (such as ozone depletion, transboundary air pollution and atmospheric emissions of mercury). Improvements to national and international governance structures would further enable the decarbonisation of shipping and aviation through deployment of low-emissions fuels, for example through stricter efficiency and carbon intensity standards. Transnational partnerships can also stimulate policy development, low-emissions technology diffusion, emission reductions and adaptation, by linking sub-national and other actors, including cities, regions, non-governmental organisations and private sector entities, and by enhancing interactions between state and non-state actors, though uncertainties remain over their costs, feasibility, and effectiveness. International environmental and sectoral agreements, institutions, and initiatives are helping, and in some cases may help, to stimulate low GHG emissions investment and reduce emissions. (medium confidence) {WGII SPM B.5.3, WGII SPM. C.5.6, WGII TS.E.5.4, WGII TS.E.5.5; WGIII SPM C.8.4, WGIII SPM E.6.3, WGIII SPM E.6.4, WGIII SPM E.6.4, WGIII TS.5.3}