Loss and damage has a range of conceptualisations (Section 1.4.4.2; Cross-Chapter Box LOSS in Chapter 17) and is a critical issue for many small islands, closely related to issues of climate justice (Section 15.7). Small islands are already experiencing an array of negative climate change impacts while climate risks are projected to increase as global average temperatures rise (Sections 15.3, 16.2; Cross-Chapter Paper 2). Barriers and limits to adaptation also contribute to greater levels of both economic and non-economic loss and damage for small islands (Sections 15.6, 16.4).For SIDS in particular, loss and damage has negative implications for sustainable development (Benjamin et al., 2018). The costs of loss and damage, particularly from extreme events, can deplete national capital reserves (Noy and Edmonds, 2019). Thomas and Benjamin (2017) show how loss and damage can lead to an ‘unvirtuous cycle of climate-induced erosion of development and resilience’. In this cycle, addressing loss and damage strains limited national resources, diverting public funding and other resources to address negative climate impacts. This in turn reduces resources and capacities which could be allocated to adaptation, building resilience and sustainable development, thereby increasing vulnerability to climate change and leading to further loss and damage where the cycle begins again. The cascading and cumulative impacts of extreme events experienced in Pacific and Caribbean SIDS exemplify that this cycle may already be in effect.In addition to the strain on national resources that loss and damage currently presents, credit ratings of SIDS have recently begun to include vulnerability to climate change, which may have negative impacts on their abilities to borrow external funds, attract foreign investment or access concessional financing (Buhr et al., 2018; Volz et al., 2020). Costs of addressing loss and damage may also affect the ability of SIDS to repay external debt, thus endangering eligibility for future access to funding (Baarsch and Kelman, 2016; Klomp, 2017; Shutter, 2020). These factors may place SIDS in situations where they face mounting costs of climate change with eroding capacities and resources to address loss and damage.In the international policy arena, small islands—as part of the AOSIS—have been strong advocates for including loss and damage in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC); highlighting the increasing and irreversible risks that climate change poses for islands in particular (Roberts and Huq, 2015; Adelman, 2016; Mace and Verheyen, 2016). AOSIS, along with other developing countries and groups, have advocated that there is a pressing need for finance and resources to address loss and damage as well as greater integration of loss and damage in the UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement, including in capacity building, technology and the global stocktake (Benjamin et al., 2018; Nand and Bardsley, 2020).