In developing countries and in many student accommodations globally, shared accommodation allows affordable housing for a large part of the population. For example, living arrangements are built expressly around the practice of sharing toilets, bathrooms and kitchens. While the sharing of such facilities does connote a lower level of service provision and quality of life, it provides access for a consumer base with very low and unreliable incomes. Thus, sharing key facilities can help guarantee the provision of affordable housing (Gulyani et al. 2018). In developed countries, large-scale developments are targeting students and ‘young professionals’ by offering shared accommodation and services. Historically shared accommodation has been part of the student life due to its flexible and affordable characteristics. However, the expansion of housing supply through densification can use shared facilities as an instrument to ‘commercialize small housing production, while housing affordability and accessibility are threatened’ (Uyttebrouck et al. 2020).With respect to travel accommodation, several models are emerging in which accommodation is offered to, or shared with, travellers by private individuals organised by business-driven or non-profit online platforms. Accommodation sharing includes peer-to-peer, ICT-enabled, short-term renting, swapping, borrowing or lending of existing privately-owned lodging facilities (Möhlmann 2015; Voytenko Palgan et al. 2017).With shared accommodation services via the platform economy, there may be risks of negative sustainability effects, such as rebound effects caused by increased travel frequency (Tussyadiah and Pesonen 2016). This is particularly a problem if apartments are removed from long-term rental markets, thus indirectly inducing construction activities, with substantial GHG emissions of their own. However, if a host shares their accommodation with a guest, the use of some resources, such as heating and lighting, is shared, thereby leading to more efficient resource use per capita (Chenoweth 2009; Voytenko Palgan et al. 2017). Given the nascence of shared accommodation via the platform economy, quantifications of its systems-level energy and emissions impacts are lacking in the literature, representing an important area for future study.