IAMs are used to develop a wide range of scenarios describing future trajectories for greenhouse gas emissions based on a wide set of assumptions regarding socio-economic development, technological changes, political development and climate policy. Typically, the IAM-based scenarios can be divided into (i) reference scenarios (describing possible trajectories in the absence of new stringent climate policies) and (ii) mitigation scenarios (describing the impact of various climate policy assumptions). Reference scenarios typically result in high emissions and, subsequently, high levels of climate change (in the order of 2.5°C–4°C during the 21st century). The purpose of such reference scenarios is to explore the consequences of climate change and act as a reference for mitigation scenarios. The possible emission levels for reference scenarios diverge from stabilising and even slowly declining emissions (e.g., for current policy scenarios or SSP1) to very high emission levels (e.g., SSP5 and RCP8.5). The latter leads to nearly 5°C of warming by the end of the century for medium climate sensitivity. Hausfather and Peters (2020) pointed out that since 2011, the rapid development of renewable energy technologies and emerging climate policy have made it considerably less likely that emissions could end up as high as RCP8.5. This means that reaching emissions levels as high as RCP8.5 has become less likely . Still, high emissions cannot be ruled out for many reasons, including political factors and, for instance, higher than anticipated population and economic growth. Climate projections of RCP8.5 can also result from strong feedbacks of climate change on (natural) emission sources and high climate sensitivity (AR6 WGI Chapter 7). Therefore, their median climate impacts might also materialise while following a lower emission path (e.g., Hausfather and Betts 2020). All in all, this means that high-end scenarios have become considerably less likely since AR5 but cannot be ruled out. High-end scenarios (like RCP8.5) can be very useful to explore high-end risks of climate change but are not typical ‘business-as-usual’ projections and should therefore not be presented as such.