Climate change is contributing to the spread of diseases in both wildlife and humans. Increased contact between wildlife and human populations increases disease risk, and climate change is altering where pathogens that cause diseases and the animals that carry them live. Disease risk can often be reduced by improving health care and sanitation systems, training the medical community to recognise and treat potential new diseases in their region, limiting human encroachment into natural areas, limiting wildlife trade and promoting sustainable and equitable socioeconomic development. Diseases transmitted between humans and animals are called zoonoses. Zoonoses comprise nearly two-thirds of known human infectious diseases and the majority of newly emerging ones. COVID-19 is the most recent zoonosis and has killed millions of people globally while devastating economies. The risk posed by Emerging Infectious Diseases (EIDs) has increased because of: (1) the movement of wild animals and their parasites into new areas as a result of climate change, global trade and travel; (2) human intrusion in natural areas and the conversion of natural areas for agriculture, livestock, the extraction of industrial/raw materials and housing; (3) increased wildlife trade and consumption; (4) increased human mobility resulting from global trade, war/conflicts and migration, made faster and extending farther due to fossil fuel-powered travel; and (5) widespread antimicrobial use, which can promote antibiotic-resistant infections (Figure FAQ2.2.1).Figure FAQ2.2.1 | How diseases move from the wild into human populations. Climate change may increase diseases in nature, but whether or not this leads to an increase in the risk of disease in humans depends upon a range of societal, infrastructural and medical buffers that form a shield protecting humans.Open figure Climate change further increases risk by altering pathogen and host animal (1) geographic ranges and habitats; (2) survival, growth and development; (3) reproduction and replication; (4) transmission and exposure (5) behaviour; and (6) access to immunologically naïve animals and people who lack resistance to infection. This can lead to novel disease emergence in new places, more frequent and larger outbreaks, and longer or shifted seasons of transmission. Climate change is making it possible for many EIDs to colonise historically colder areas that are becoming warmer and wetter in temperate and polar regions and in the mountains. Vector-borne diseases (VBDs) are diseases spread by vectors such as mosquitoes, sand flies, kissing bugs and ticks. For example, ticks that carry the virus that causes tick-borne encephalitis have moved into the northern subarctic regions of Asia and Europe. Viruses like dengue, chikungunya and Japanese encephalitis are emerging in Nepal in hilly and mountainous areas. Novel outbreaks of Vibrio bacteria seafood poisoning are being traced to the the Baltic States and Alaska where they were never documented before. Many scientific studies show that the transmission of infectious disease and the number of individuals infected depends on rainfall and temperature; climate change often makes these conditions more favourable for disease transmission.Climate change can also have complicated, compounding and contradictory effects on pathogens and vectors. Increased rainfall creates more habitat for mosquitoes that transmit diseases like malaria, but too much rain washes away the habitat. Decreased rainfall also increases disease risk when people without reliable access to water use containers to store water where mosquitoes, such as the vectors of dengue fever Aedes aegypti and A. albopictus, lay their eggs. Hotter temperatures also increase mosquito-bite rate, parasite development and viral replication! Certain species of snails are intermediate hosts for many helminth parasites that make humans, livestock and wild animals sick. When it gets hot, the snails can produce 2–3 times as many infective larvae; however, if it becomes too hot, many pathogens and their vectors cannot survive or reproduce.Humans also contract zoonoses directly through their skin, mucus membranes and lungs, when eating or butchering animals or when they come into contact with pathogens that are shed into the air or passed in urine and faeces and contaminate water, food, clothing and other surfaces. Any activity that increases contact with wildlife, especially in high-biodiversity regions like the Tropics and subtropics, increases disease risk. Climate change-related disease emergence events are often rare but may become more frequent. Fortunately, there are ways to reduce risks and protect our health, as described below.Habitat and biodiversity protection. Human encroachment into natural areas, due to expansion of agriculture and livestock, timber harvests, extraction of resources and urban development, has increased human contact with wild animals and creates more opportunities for disease spill-over (transmission from an animal to a new species, including humans). By conserving, protecting and restoring wild habitats, we can build healthier ecosystems that provide other services, such as clean air, clean and abundant water, recreation, spiritual value and well-being, as well as reduced disease spill-over. If humans must go into wild areas or hunt, they should take appropriate precautions such as wearing protective clothing, using insect repellant, performing body checks for vectors like ticks and washing their hands and clothing well.Food resilience. Investing in sustainable agro-ecological farming will alleviate the pressure to hunt wild animals and reduce the conversion of more land to agriculture/livestock use. Stopping illegal animal trading and poaching and decreasing reliance on wild meats and products made from animal parts will reduce direct contact with potentially infected animals. This has the added benefit of increasing food security and nutrition, improving soil, reducing erosion, preserving biodiversity and mitigating climate change.Disease prevention and response. The level of protection against infection is linked directly to the level of development and wealth of a country. Improved education, high-quality medical and veterinary systems, high food security, proper sanitation of water and waste, high-quality housing, disease surveillance and alarm systems dramatically reduce disease risk and improve health. Utilising a One Biosecurity or One Health framework further improves resilience. Sharing knowledge within communities, municipalities, regionally and between national health authorities globally is important to assessing, preventing and responding to outbreaks and pandemics more efficiently and economically.Humans are facing many direct and indirect challenges because of climate change. The increase in EIDs is one of our greatest challenges, due to our ever-growing interactions with wildlife and climatic changes creating new disease transmission patterns. COVID-19 is a current crisis, and follows other recent EIDs: SARS, HIV/AIDS, H1N1 influenza, Ebola, Zika and West Nile fever. EIDs have accelerated in recent decades, making it clear that new societal and environmental approaches to wildlife interactions, climate change and health are urgently needed to protect our current and future well-being as a species.