Climate hazards undermine adaptation by damaging livelihoods (high confidence). Many actions that enhance and promote resilient livelihoods can have substantial benefit for adaptation to climate hazards (medium confidence). Livelihoods in the context of climate change are characterised by adjustments that then feed back into the assets that comprise a livelihood. Social capital–in the form of household and community cohesion–facilitates the development of adaptation strategies to the impacts of climate change in rural and urban communities at the household level and for small groups (Barbier, 2014; Nawrotzki et al., 2015b; Nawrotzki et al., 2015c). Cultural capital, especially in the form of Indigenous knowledge and local knowledge, can guide adaptation practices in North America (Akpinar Ferrand and Cecunjanin, 2014), preserving Indigenous cultures and enhancing future adaptation and resilience (see Box 14.1; Pearce et al., 2012; Audefroy and Cabrera Sánchez, 2017). In Mexico, rainwater harvesting (practised by some Mayan communities) and the use of local–traditional varieties of maize have assisted in the adaptation to climate impacts and promoted food security (Akpinar Ferrand and Cecunjanin, 2014; Hellin et al., 2014). Funding and support for these social adaptation strategies have been uneven (Barbier, 2014; Romeo-Lankao et al., 2014). The legacy of colonialism and historical patterns of development will continue to shape the adaptation responses and resiliency of Indigenous Peoples (Todd, 2015; Davis and Todd, 2017; Whyte, 2017; Cameron et al., 2019).Migration is a common adaptation strategy to maintain and diversify people’s livelihoods and will continue to play an important role when households manage climate and social risks (high confidence) (Section 7.4.3). In the near term, actions that enhance in situ adaptive capacities as well as foster safe and orderly migration can result in synergies for both adaptation and development (Cross-Chapter Box MIGRATE in Chapter 7). Populations that experience less mobility or cannot engage in voluntary migration as an adaptation may need additional support to adapt to climate hazards, for example, northern communities that are at risk of climatic events (Hamilton et al., 2016). Policies associated with the transition from high-GHG intensive extractive industries, sometimes referred to as ‘just transitions’, may also support in situ livelihoods if they also aim to address and redress existing inequalities to reduce vulnerabilities (McCauley, 2018); however, these policies could result in maladaptation if they create new inequalities or generate other environmental damages.