In 2005, the Dutch national government acknowledged a move in the House of Representatives to utilise their annual spending power to promote the market for sustainable goods and services, as well as to act as a role model. Hence, a policy for environmentally-friendly procurement was developed and implemented across the national, local and provincial governments. Subsequently, sustainable public procurement has expanded into a multidimensional policy in The Netherlands, accommodating policies on green public procurement, bio-based public procurement, international social criteria, social return on investment, innovation-oriented public procurement and circular economy.The Green Public Procurement (GPP) policy is targeted at minimising the negative impacts of production and consumption on the nature environment (Melissen and Reinders 2012; Cerutti et al. 2016). It includes a wide range of environmental criteria for different product groups that public organisations frequently procure, such as office equipment, uniforms, road works and catering. There are 45 product groups (Melissen and Reinders, 2012) and six product clusters as part of the government’s purchasing in terms of sustainability (PIANOo Expertisecentrum 2020). The six product clusters are: i) automation and telecommunications; ii) energy; iii) ground, road and hydraulic engineering; iv) office facilities and services; v) office buildings; and vi) transport (PIANOo Expertisecentrum 2020).The GPP 2020 Tender Implementation Plan spells out the terms and conditions for green public procurement. Some of these are confidential documents and are not shared online. Others are available for download. The tender implementation plan for The Netherlands is available onhttps://gpp2020.eu/low-carbon-tenders/open-tenders/. One of the important scenarios is that the public procurers need the details of Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) carried out in a tool called DuboCalc, which calculates the environmental impacts of the materials and methods of an infrastructural projects. GPP 2020 has reported that three million tonnes of CO2 would be saved in The Netherlands alone if all Dutch public authorities applied the national Sustainable Public Procurement Criteria.Research has been carried out to determine the prime mover for implementing Green Public Procurement. An online survey was administered among public procurement officers who subscribed to the newsletters of two Dutch associations that provide advice and training to public procurers. This yielded a sample size of more than 200 (Grandia and Voncken 2019). The first association is called Nevi which is the only organisation in The Netherlands that offers certified procurement training programmes. The second association is called PIANOo which is a public procurement expertise centre paid by the Dutch national government to bring together relevant information regarding public procurement and provide public procurers with useful tools through their websites, workshops, meetings and annual conferences. The data from the survey was then analysed using structural equations modelling (SEM) and the results show that ability, motivation and opportunities affect the implementation of GPP. Particularly, opportunity was found to affect GPP, innovation-oriented public procurement and the circular economy, but not the other types of public procurement.