South-South cooperation (SSC) and triangular cooperation (TrC) are bold, innovative, and rapidly developing means of strengthening cooperation for the achievement of the SDGs (FAO 2018). SSC is gaining momentum in achieving sustainable development and climate actions in developing countries (UN 2017b). Through SSC, countries are able to map their capacity needs and knowledge gaps and find sustainable, cost-effective, long-lasting and economically viable solutions (FAO 2019). In the UN Climate Change Engagement Strategy 2017 (UNOSSC 2017), South-South Cooperation Action Plan is identified as a substantive pillar to support.In 2019, the role of South-South and triangular cooperation was further highlighted with the BAPA+40 Outcome document (UN 2019), noting outstanding contributions to alleviating global inequality, promoting sustainable development and climate actions, promoting gender equality and enriching multilateral mechanisms. Furthermore, the role of triangular cooperation was explicitly recognised in the document reflecting its increasingly relevant role in the implementation of the SDGs (UN 2019).There has been a recent resurgence of South-South cooperation (Gray and Gills 2016). The South-South Cooperation Action Plan was adopted by the UN as a substantive pillar to support the implementation of the UN Climate Change Engagement Strategy 2017 (UNOSSC 2017). Liu et al. (2017a) explored prospects for South–South cooperation for large‐scale ecological restoration, which is an important solution to mitigate climate change. Emphasis is given to experience and expertise sharing, co-financing, and co-development of new knowledge and know‐how for more effective policy and practice worldwide, especially in developing and newly industrialised countries.Janus et al. (2014) explore evolving development cooperation and its future governance architecture based on The Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation and The United Nations Development Cooperation Forum. Drawing on evidence from the hydropower, solar and wind energy industry in China, Urban (2018) introduces the concept of ‘geographies of technology transfer and cooperation’ and challenges the North–South technology transfer and cooperation paradigm for low-carbon innovation and climate change mitigation. While North–South technology transfer and cooperation (NSTT) for low-carbon energy technology has been implemented for decades, South–South technology transfer and cooperation (SSTT) and South–North technology transfer and cooperation (SNTT) have only recently emerged. Kirchherr and Urban (2018)  provide a meta-synthesis of the scholarly writings on NSTT, SSTT and SNTT from the past 30 years. The discussion focuses on core drivers and inhibitors of technology transfer and cooperation, outcomes as well as outcome determinants. A case study of transfer of low‐carbon energy innovation and its opportunities and barriers, based on the first large Chinese‐funded and Chinese‐built dam in Cambodia is presented by Hensengerth (2017).Hensengerth (2017) explores the role that technology transfer/cooperation from Europe played in shaping firm-level wind energy technologies in China and India and discusses the recent technology cooperation between the Chinese, Indian, and European wind firms. The research finds that firm-level technology transfer/cooperation shaped the leading wind energy technologies in China and to a lesser extent in India. Thus, the technology cooperation between China, India, and Europe has become multi-faceted and increasingly Southern-led.Rampa et al. (2012) focus on the manner in which African states understand and approach new opportunities for cooperation with emerging powers, especially China, India and Brazil, including the crucial issue of whether they seek joint development initiatives with both traditional partners and emerging powers. UN (2018) presents and analyses case studies of SSTT in Asia and Pacific and Latin America and Caribbean regions. Illustrative case studies on TrC can be consulted in Shimoda and Nakazawa (2012), and specific cases on biofuel SSC and TrC in UNCTAD (2012).The central argument in the majority of these case studies is that South–South cooperation, which is value-neutral, is contributing to sustainable development and capacity building (Rampa et al. 2012; Shimoda and Nakazawa 2012; UN 2018). An important new development in SSC is that in relation to some technologies the cooperation is increasingly led by Southern countries (for instance, wind energy between Europe, India and China), challenging the classical North–South technology cooperation paradigm. More broadly, Parties should ensure the sustainability of cooperation, rather than focusing on short-term goals (Eyben 2013). The Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) is a classic example of a recent SSC initiative led by China. According to a joint study by Tsinghua University and Vivid Economics, the 126 countries in the BRI region, excluding China, currently account for about 28% of global GHG emissions, but this proportion may increase to around 66% by 2050 if the carbon intensity of these economies only decreases slowly (according to historical patterns shown by developing countries). In this context it is important to highlight that China has already outlined a vision for a green BRI, and recently increased its commitment through the Green Investment Principles initiative, announcing a new international coalition to improve sustainability and promote green infrastructure (Jun and Zadek 2019).Information on triangular cooperation is more readily available than on South–South cooperation though some UN organisations such as UNDP and FAO have established platforms for the latter which also include climate projects. Further, although there are many South–South cooperation initiatives involving the development and transfer of climate technologies, the understanding of the motivations, approaches and designs is limited and not easily accessible. There is no dedicated platform for South–South and triangular cooperation on climate technologies. Hence, it is still too early to fully assess the achievements in the field of climate action (UNFCCC and UNOSSC 2018). In order to maximise its unique contribution to Agenda 2030, Southern providers recognise the benefits of measuring and monitoring South–South cooperation, and there is a clear demand for better information from partner countries. Di Ciommo (2017) argues that ‘better data could support monitoring and evaluation, improve effectiveness, explore synergies with other resources, and ensure accountability’ to a diverse set of stakeholders. Besharati et al. (2017) present a framework of 20 indicators, organised in five dimensions, that researchers and policymakers can use to access the quality and effectiveness of SSC and its contribution to sustainable development.The global landscape of development cooperation has changed dramatically in recent years, with countries of the South engaging in collaborative learning models to share innovative, adaptable and cost-efficient solutions to their development and socio-economic-environmental challenges, ranging from poverty and education to climate change. The proliferation of new actors and cross-regional modalities has enriched the understanding and practice of development cooperation and generated important changes in the global development architecture towards a more inclusive, effective, and horizontal development agenda. South–South cooperation will grow in the future, while it is complimentary to North–South cooperation. However, there are knowledge gaps in relation to the precise volume, impact, effectiveness and quality of development cooperation from emerging development partners. This gap needs to be plugged, and evidence on such cooperation strengthened.