Finally, the literature review and analysis in Chapter 12 has taken account of the post-AR5 literature available and accessible to the chapter authors. Nonetheless, the assessment of the chapter is incomplete without mentioning knowledge gaps encountered during the assessment. These knowledge gaps include:1. Interactions (synergies and trade-offs) between different CDR methods when deployed together are under-researched:– co-benefits and trade-offs with biodiversity and ecosystem services associated with the implementation of CDR methods.– constraining technical costs and potentials for CDR methods to define realistically achievable costs and potentials. Such research is useful for improving the representation of CDR methods in IAMs and country-level mitigation pathway modelling.2. More work is required on how framing and communication of mitigation actions in terms of mitigation versus co-benefits potential affects public support in different contexts.3. Additional research work is required to determine the cross-sectoral mitigation potential of emerging general-purpose technologies.4. There is a lack of literature on mitigation finance frameworks promoting cross-sectoral mitigation linkages.5. Additional research is needed to better quantify the net GHG emissions and co-benefits and adverse effects of emerging food technologies.–Research in social and behavioural sciences should invest in assessing effectiveness of instruments aiming at shifting food choices in different national contexts.–A better evidence basis is required to understand synergistic effects of policies in food system policy packages.6. There is a lack of literature on regional and global mitigation potential of biomass production systems that are strategically deployed in agriculture and forestry landscapes, to achieve specific co-benefits.7. There is a lack of knowledge on land occupation and associated co-benefits and adverse side effects from large-scale deployment of non-AFOLU mitigation options, and how such options can be integrated with agriculture and forestry to maximise synergies and minimise trade-offs.