In this section we conceptually address interactions between service demand, service product intensity, product material efficiency, energy efficiency, electrication and fuel switching, CCU and CCS, and what conflicts and synergies may exist. Post AR5 a substantial literature has emerged, see Rissman et al. (2020), that addresses integrated and interactive technical deep decarbonisation pathways for GHG-intense industrial sectors, and how they interact with the rest of the economy (Denis-Ryan et al. 2016; Åhman et al. 2017; Wesseling et al. 2017; Axelson et al. 2018; Davis et al. 2018; Bataille et al. 2018a; Bataille 2020a). It is a common finding across this literature and a related scenario literature (Energy Transitions Commission 2018; Material Economics 2019; UKCCC 2019a,b; IEA 2019b, 2020a; CAT 2020; IEA 2021a) that deep decarbonisation of industry requires integrating all available options. There is no ‘silver bullet’ and so all behavioural and technological options have to be mobilised, with more emphasis required on the policy mechanisms necessary to engage a challenging transition in the coming decades in highly competitive, currently GHG-intense, price-sensitive sectors with long-lived capital stock (Wesseling et al. 2017; Bataille et al. 2018a; Bataille 2020a), discussed in the final section of this chapter.While the strategies are not sequential and interact strongly, we discuss them in the order given. Reduced demand through reduced service demand and product intensity per service unit (Grubler et al. 2018; van Vuuren et al. 2018) reduces the need for the next six strategies. Greater material efficiency (see earlier sections) reduces the need for the next five, and so on – see Figure 11.9 above.Figure 11.9 | Fully interactive, non-sequential strategies for decarbonising industry. Open figure Circular economy introduces itself throughout, but mainly at the front end when designing materials and processes to be more materially efficient, efficient in use, and easy to recycle, and at the back end, when a material or product’s services life has come to end, and it is time for recycling or sustainable disposal (Murray et al. 2017; Korhonen et al. 2018). The entire chain’s potential will be maximised when these strategies are designed in ahead of time instead of considered on assembly, or as a retrofit (Allwood et al. 2012; Gonzalez Hernandez et al. 2018a; IEA 2019b; Material Economics 2019; Bataille 2020a). For example, when designing a building: (i) Is the building shell, interior mass and ducting orientated for passive heating and cooling, and can the shell and roof have building-integrated solar PV or added easily, with hard-to-retrofit wiring already incorporated? (ii) Are steel and high-quality concrete only used where really needed (i.e., for shear, tension and compression strength), can sections be prefabricated off-site, can other materials be substituted, such as wood? (iii) Can the interior fittings be built with easy-to-recycle plastics or other sustainably disposable materials (e.g., wood)? (iv) Can this building potentially serve multiple purposes through its anticipated lifetime, are service conduits oversized and easy to access for retrofitting? (v) When it is time to be taken apart, can pieces be reused, and all componnents recycled at high purity levels, for example, can all the copper wiring be easily be found and removed, are the steel beams clearly tagged with their content? The answers to these questions will be very regionally and site specific, and require revision of educational curricula for the entire supply chain, as well as revision of building codes.Energy efficiency is a critical strategy for net zero transitions and enabling clean electrification (IEA 2021a). Improving the efficiency of energy services provision reduces the need for material intensive energy supply, energy storage, CCU and CCS infrastructure, and limits generation and transmission expansion to reduce an ever-higherdemand, with associated generation, transmission, and distribution losses. Using electricity efficiently can help reduces peak demand and the need for peaking plants (currently often powered by fossil fuels), and energy storage systems.Electrification and final energy efficiency are deeply entangled, because switching to electricity from fossil fuels in most cases improves GJ for GJ end-use energy efficiency: resistance heaters are almost 100% efficient, heat pumps can be 300–400% efficient, induction melting can improve mixing and temperature control, and electric vehicle motors typically translate 90–95% of input electricity to motor drive in contrast to 35–45% for a large, modern internal combustion engine. Overall, the combined effect could be 40% lower global final energy demand assuming renewable electricity is used (Eyre 2021).There are potentially complicated physical and market fuel switching relationships between low-GHG electricity, bioliquids and gases, hydrogen, ammonia, and synthetic hydrocarbons constructed using CCU, with remaining CO2 potentially being disposed of using CCS. Whether or not they compete for a wide range of end uses and primary demand needs will be regional and whether or not infrastructure is available to supply them. Regions with less than optimal renewable energy resources, or not sufficient to meet growing needs, could potentially indirectly import them as liquid or compressed hydrogen, ammonia or synthetic hydrocarbon feedstocks made in regions with abundant resources (Armijo and Philibert 2020; Bataille 2020a). Large-scale CCU and CCS applications need additional basic materials to build corresponding infrastructure and energy to operate it, thus reducing overall material and energy efficiencies.There are different roles for different actors in relation to the different mitigation strategies (exemplified in Table 11.2), with institutions and supply chains developed to widely varying levels, for example, while energy efficiency is a relatively mature strategy with an established supply chain, material efficiency is not.Table 11.2| Examples of the potential roles of different actors in relation to different mitigation strategies indicating the importance of engaging a wide set of actors across all mitigat ion strategies. SectorsDemand control measures (DM)Materials efficiency (ME)Circular economyEnergy efficiencyElectrification, hydrogen and fuel switchingCCUCCSArchitectural and engineering firmsBuild awareness on the material demand implications of e.g., building codes, urban planning and infrastructure.Education of designers, architects and engineers, etc.Develop design tools. Map material flows.Design and build for e.g., repurpose, reuse and recycle. Improve transparency on volumes and flows.Maintain high expertise, knowledge sharing, transparency, and benchmarking.Support innovation.Share best practice. Design for dynamic demand response for grid balancing.Develop allocation rules, monitoring and transparency.Coordination and collaboration across sectors.Transparency, monitoring and labelling.Coordination and collaboration for transport and disposal infrastructure.Industry and service sectorDigital solutions to reduce office space and travel. Service-oriented business models for lower product demand.Design for durability and light weight.Minimise industry scrap.Design for reuse and recycling. Use recycled feedstock and develop industrial symbiosis.Maintain energy management systems.Develop and deploy new technologies in production, engage with lead markets.Develop new technologies.Engage in new value chains and collaborations for sourcing carbon.Plan for CCS where possible and phase-out of non-retrofittable plants where necessary.International bodiesBest practice sharing.Knowledge building on demand options.Progressivity in international standards (e.g., ISO).Transparency and regulation around products, waste handling, trade, and recycling.Maintain efforts for sharing good practice and knowledge.Coordinate innovation efforts, technology transfer, lead markets, and trade policies.Coordinate and develop accounting and standards. Ensure transparency.Align regulation to facilitate export, transport, and storage.Regional and national government, and citiesReconsider spatial planning and regulation that has demand implications.Procurement guidelines and better indicators. Standards and building codes.Regulation on product design (e.g., Ecodesign Directive).Collect material-flow data.Continue energy efficiency policies such as incentives, standards, labels, and disclosure requirements.R&D and electricity infrastructure. Policy strategies for making investment viable (including carbon pricing instruments).Align regulation to facilitate implementation and ensure accountability for emissions.Develop regulation and make investment viable.Resolve long-term liabilities.Civil society and consumer organisationsInformation and advocacy related to social norms.Strengthen lobby efforts and awareness around e.g., planned obsolescence.Engage in standards, monitoring and transparency.Monitor progress.Information on embodied emissions. Assess renewable electricity and grid expansion.Develop standards and accounting rules.Ensure transparency and accountability.