Successive WGIII IPCC assessments have emphasised the importance of climate mitigation along with the need to consider broader societal goals especially sustainable development. Key insights from AR5 and the subsequent three Special Reports (IPCC 2018b, 2019b, 2019c) are summarised below.The AR5 projected that in baseline scenarios (i.e., based on prevailing trends without explicit additional mitigation efforts), agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU) would be the only sector where emissions could fall by 2100, with some CO2 removal (IPCC 2014b, p. 17). Direct CO2 emissions from energy were projected to double or even triple by 2050 (IPCC 2014b, p. 20) due to global population and economic growth, resulting in global mean surface temperature increases in 2100 from 3.7°C to 4.8°C compared to pre-industrial levels. The AR5 noted that mitigation effort and the costs associated with ambitious mitigation differ significantly across countries, and in ‘globally cost-effective’ scenarios, the biggest reductions (relative to projections) occur in the countries with the highest future emissions in the baseline scenarios (IPCC 2014b, p. 17). Since most physical capital (e.g., power plants, buildings, transport infrastructure) involved in GHG emissions is long-lived, the timing of the shift in investments and strategies will be crucial (IPCC 2014b, p. 18).A key message from recent Special Reports is the urgency to mitigate GHG emissions in order to avoid rapid and potentially irreversible changes in natural and human systems (IPCC 2018b, 2019b, 2019c). Successive IPCC reports have drawn upon increasing sophistication of modelling tools to project emissions in the absence of ambitious decarbonisation action, as well as the emission pathways that meet long-term temperature targets. The SR1.5 examined pathways limiting warming to 1.5°C, compared to the historical baseline of 1850–1900, finding that ‘in pathways with no or limited overshoot of 1.5°C, global net anthropogenic CO2 emissions decline by about 45% from 2010 levels by 2030, reaching net zero around 2050’ (2045–2055 interquartile range); with ‘overshoot’ referring to higher temperatures, then brought down by 2100 through ‘net negative’ emissions. It found this would require rapid and far-reaching transitions in energy, land, urban and infrastructure (including transport and buildings), and industrial systems ( high confidence) (IPCC 2018b).The SR1.5 found that the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) as declared under the Paris Agreement (PA) would not limit warming to 1.5°C; despite significant updates to NDCs in 2020/21, this remains the case, although delivery of these more ambitious NDCs would somewhat enhance the prospects for staying below 2°C (Section 1.3.3).The AR5 WGIII and the Special Reports analysed economic costs associated with climate action. The estimates vary widely depending on the assumptions made as to how ordered the transition is, temperature target, technology availability, and the metric or model used, among others (Chapter 6). Modelled direct mitigation costs of pathways to 1.5°C, with no/limited overshoot, span a wide range, but were typically three to four times higher than in pathways to 2°C ( high confidence), before taking account of benefits, including significant reduction in loss of life and livelihoods, and avoided climate impacts (IPCC 2018b).Successive IPCC reports highlight a strong connection between climate mitigation and sustainable development. Climate mitigation and adaptation goals have synergies and trade-offs with efforts to achieve sustainable development, including poverty eradication. A comprehensive assessment of climate policy therefore involves going beyond a narrow focus on specific mitigation and adaptation options to incorporate climate issues into the design of comprehensive strategies for equitable sustainable development. At the same time, some climate mitigation policies can run counter to sustainable development and eradicating poverty, which highlights the need to consider trade-offs alongside benefits. Examples include synergies between climate policy and improved air quality, reducing premature deaths and morbidity (IPCC 2014b, Figure SPM.6) (AR6 WGI Sections 6.6.3 and 6.7.3), but there would be trade-offs if policy raises net energy bills, with distributional implications. The Special Report on Climate Change and Land (SRCCL) also emphasises important synergies and trade-offs, bringing new light on the link between healthy and sustainable food consumption and emissions caused by the agricultural sector. Land-related responses that contribute to climate change adaptation and mitigation can also combat desertification and land degradation, and enhance food security (IPCC 2019a).Previous Assessment Reports (ARs) have detailed the contribution of various sectors and activities to global GHG emissions. When indirect emissions (mainly from electricity, heat and other energy conversions) are included, the four main consumption (end-use) drivers are industry, AFOLU, buildings and transport (Figure 2.14), though the magnitude of these emissions can vary widely between countries. These – together with the energy and urban systems which feed and shape end-use sectors – define the sectoral chapters in this AR6 WGIII report.Estimates of emissions associated with production and transport of internationally traded goods were first presented in AR5 WGIII, which estimated the ‘embodied emission transfers’ from upper-middle-income countries to industrialised countries through trade at about 10% of CO2 emissions in each of these groups (IPCC 2014a, Figure TS.5). The literature on this and discussion on their accounting has grown substantially since then (Chapters 2 and 8).The atmosphere is a shared global resource and an integral part of the ‘global commons’. In the depletion/restoration of this resource, myriad actors at various scales are involved, for instance, individuals, communities, firms and states. Inter alia, international cooperation to tackle ozone depletion and acid rain offer useful examples. The AR5 noted that greater cooperation would ensue if policies are perceived as fair and equitable by all countries along the spectrum of economic development – implying a need for equitable sharing of the effort. A key takeaway from AR5 is that climate policy involves value judgement and ethics. (IPCC 2014a Box TS.1: ‘People and countries have rights and owe duties towards each other. These are matters of justice, equity, or fairness. They fall within the subject matter of moral and political philosophy, jurisprudence, and economics.’ p. 37). International cooperation and collective action on climate change alongside local, national, regional and global policies will be crucial to solve the problem, and this report notes cooperative approaches beyond simple ‘global commons’ framings (Chapters 13 and 14).The AR5 (all Working Group reports) also underlined that climate policy inherently involves risk and uncertainty (in nature, economy, society and individuals). To help evaluate responses, there exists a rich suite of analytical tools, for example, cost-benefit analysis, cost-effectiveness analysis, multi-criteria analysis, expected utility theory, and catastrophe and risk models. All have pros and cons, and have been further developed in subsequent literature and in AR6 (Sections 1.2.2 and 1.7).Recent assessments (IPCC 2014a, 2018b) began to consider the role of individual behavioural choices and cultural norms in driving energy and food patterns. Notably, SR1.5 (Section 4.4.3) outlined emerging evidence on the potential for changes in behaviour, lifestyle and culture to contribute to decarbonisation (and lower the cost); for the first time, AR6 devotes a whole chapter (Chapter 5) to consider these and other underlying drivers of energy demand, food choices and social aspects.