Demand-side mitigation and new ways of providing services can helpavoid, shift , andimprovefinal service demand. Rapid and deep changes in demand make it easier for every sector to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the short and medium term (high confidence). {5.2, 5.3}The indicative potential of demand-side strategies to reduce emissions of direct and indirect CO2 and non-CO2 GHG emissions in three end-use sectors (buildings, land transport, and food) is 40–70% globally by 2050 (high confidence). Technical mitigation potentials compared to the 2050 emissions projection of two scenarios consistent with policies announced by national governments until 2020 amount to 6.8 GtCO2 for building use and construction, 4.6 GtCO2 for land transport and 8.0 GtCO2-eq for food demand, and amount to 4.4 GtCO2 for industry. Mitigation strategies can be classified as Avoid-Shift-Improve (ASI) options, that reflect opportunities for socio-cultural, infrastructural, and technological change. The greatest ‘Avoid’ potential comes from reducing long-haul aviation and providing short-distance low-carbon urban infrastructures. The greatest ‘Shift’ potential would come from switching to plant-based diets. The greatest ‘Improve’ potential comes from within the building sector, and in particular increased use of energy-efficient end-use technologies and passive housing. {5.3.1, 5.3.2, Figure 5.7, Figure 5.8, Table 5.1, <a class='section-link' data-title='Demand, services and social aspects of mitigation' href='/chapters/chapter-5'>Chapter 5</a> Supplementary Material II, Table 5.SM.2}Socio-cultural and lifestyle changes can accelerate climate change mitigation (medium confidence). Among 60 identified actions that could change individual consumption, individual mobility choices have the largest potential to reduce carbon footprints. Prioritising  car-free mobility by walking and cycling and adoption of electric mobility could save 2 tCO2-eq cap –1 yr –1. Other options with high mitigation potential include reducing air travel, heating and cooling set-point adjustments, reduced appliance use, shifts to public transit, and shifting consumption towards plant-based diets. {5.3.1, 5.3.1.2, Figure 5.8}Leveraging improvements in end-use service delivery through behavioural and technological innovations, and innovations in market organisation, leads to large reductions in upstream resource use (high confidence). Analysis of indicative potentials range from a factor 10- to 20-fold improvement in the case of available energy (exergy) analysis, with the highest improvement potentials at the end-user and service-provisioning levels. Realisable service-level efficiency improvements could reduce upstream energy demand by 45% in 2050. {5.3.2, Figure 5.10}Alternative service provision systems, for example those enabled through digitalisation, sharing economy initiatives and circular economy initiatives, have to date made a limited contribution to climate change mitigation (medium confidence). While digitalisation through specific new products and applications holds potential for improvement in service-level efficiencies, without public policies and regulations, it also has the potential to increase consumption and energy use. Reducing the energy use of data centres, networks, and connected devices is possible in managing low-carbon digitalisation. Claims on the benefits of the circular economy for sustainability and climate change mitigation have limited evidence. {5.3.4, 5.3.4.1, 5.3.4.2, Figure 5.12, Figure 5.13}