There is  high evidence and  highagreement  that ‘Avoid’ policies that affect lifestyle changes offer opportunities for cost-effective reductions in energy use and emissions, but would need to overcome political sensitivities around government efforts to shape and modify individual-level behaviour (Rosenow et al. 2017; Grubb et al. 2020) (Table 5.5). These policies include ways to help avoid travel growth through integrated city planning or building retrofits to help avoid demand for transport, heating or cooling (Bakker et al. 2014; Lucon et al. 2014; de Feijter et al. 2019), which interact with existing infrastructure. Dense pedestrianised cities and towns and medium-density transit corridors are better placed to implement policies for car reductions than ‘sprawled’ cities characterised by low-density, auto-dependent and separated land uses (Seto et al. 2014; Newman and Kenworthy 2015; Newman et al. 2017; Bakker et al. 2014).Cities face pressing priorities like poverty reduction, meeting basic services and building human and institutional capacity. These are met with highly accessible walkable and cyclable cities, connected with public transit corridors, enabling equal accessibility for all citizens, and enabling a high level of service provisioning (UN-Habitat 2013; Creutziget al. 2016b). Infrastructure development costs less than for car dependent cities. However, it requires a mindset shift for urban and transport planners (medium evidence, high agreement ).Policies that support the avoidance of higher-emission lifestyles and improve well-being are facilitated by the introduction of smart technologies, infrastructures and practices (Amini et al. 2019). They include regulations and measures for investment in high-quality ICT infrastructure and regulations to restrict number plates, as well as company policy around flexible working conditions (Lachapelle et al. 2018; Shabanpour et al. 2018). Working-from-home arrangements may advantage certain segments of society such as male, older, higher-educated and highly-paid employees, potentially exacerbating existing inequalities in the labour market (Lambert et al. 2020; Bonacini et al. 2021). In the absence of distributive or other equity-based measures, the potential gains in terms of emissions reduction may therefore be counteracted by the cost of increasing inequality. This potential growth in inequality is likely to be more severe in poorer countries that will additionally suffer from a lack of international funding for achieving the SDGs ( high evidence, medium agreement ) (Barbier and Burgess 2020; UN 2020).Table 5.5 | Examples of policies to enable ‘Avoid’ options. Mitigation optionPerceived struggles to overcomePolicy to overcome struggles (Incentives)  Reduce passenger km–Existing paradigms and planning practices and car dependency (Rosenow et al. 2017; Grubb et al. 2020)–Financial and capacity barrier in many developing countries– Status dimension of private cars–Integrated city planning to avoid travel growth, car reduction, building retrofits to avoid heating or cooling demand (Bakker et al. 2014; Lucon et al. 2014; de Feijter et al. 2019)–Public-private partnership to overcome financial barrier (Roy et al. 2018b) (Box 5.8)–Taxation of status consumption; reframing of low-carbon transport as high status (Hoor 2020; Ramakrishnan and Creutzig 2021)Reduce/Avoid food wasteLittle visible political and social momentum to prevent food waste in the Global NorthStrengthen national nutrition guidelines for health safety; improve education/awareness on food waste; policies to eliminate ambiguous food labelling include well-defined and clear date labelling systems for food (Wilson et al. 2017); policies to support R&D to improve packaging to extend shelf life (Thyberg and Tonjes 2016); charging according to how much food households throw awayReduce size of dwellingsSize of dwellings getting larger in many countriesCompact city design, taxing residential properties with high per capita area, progressive taxation of high status consumption (Ramakrishnan and Creutzig 2021)Reduce/Avoid heating, cooling and lighting in dwellingsChange in individual behaviour in dress codes and working timesTemperature set point as norm; building energy codes that set building standards; bioclimatic and/or zero emissions buildings; cities and buildings that incorporate features like daylighting and increased building depth, height, and compactness (Steemers 2003; Creutzig et al. 2016a)Sharing economy for more service per product Lack of inclusivity and involvement of users in design. Digital divide, unequal access and unequal digital literacy (Pouri and Hilty 2018). Political or power relations among actors involved in the sharing economy (Curtis and Lehner 2019)Lower prices for public parking, and subsidies towards the purchase of electric vehicles for providers of electric vehicle sharing services (Jung and Koo 2018)