Studies of past and future changes in weather and climate extremes, and in the mean state of the climate, use the same original sources of weather and climate observations, including in situ observations, remotely sensed data, and derived data products such as reanalyses. Sections 2.3 and 10.2 assess various aspects of these data sources and data products from the perspective of their general use, and in the analysis of changes in the mean state of the climate in particular. Building on these previous chapters, this subsection highlights particular aspects that are related to extremes and are most relevant to the assessment of this Chapter. The SREX (Chapter 3, Seneviratne et al., 2012) and AR5 (Chapter 2, Hartmann et al., 2013) addressed critical issues regarding the quality and availability of observed data and their relevance for the assessment of changes in extremes.Extreme weather and climate events occur on time scales of hours (e.g., convective storms that produce heavy precipitation) to days (e.g., tropical cyclones, heatwaves), to seasons and years (e.g., droughts). A robust determination of long-term changes in these events can have different requirements for the spatial and temporal scales and sample size of the data. In general, it is more difficult to determine long-term changes for events of fairly large temporal duration, such as ‘megadroughts’ that last several years or longer (e.g., Ault et al., 2014), because of the limitations of the observational sample size. Literature that studies changes in extreme precipitation and temperature often uses indices representing specifics of extremes that are derived from daily precipitation and temperature values. Station-based indices would have the same issues as those for the mean climate regarding the quality, availability, and homogeneity of the data. For the purpose of constructing regional information and/or for comparison with model outputs, such as model evaluation, and detection and attribution, these station-based indices are often interpolated onto regular grids. Two different approaches, involving two different orders of operation, have been used in producing such gridded datasets.In some cases, such as for the HadEX3 dataset (Dunn et al., 2020), indices of extremes are computed using time series directly derived from stations first, and are then gridded over the space. As the indices are computed at the station level, the gridded data products represent point estimates of the indices averaged over the spatial scale of the grid box. In other instances, daily values of station observations are first gridded (e.g., Contractor et al., 2020a), and the interpolated values can then be used to compute various indices. Depending on the station density, values for extremes computed from data gridded this way represent extremes of spatial scales anywhere from the size of the grid box to a point. In regions with high station density (e.g., North America, Europe), the gridded values are closer to extremes of area means and are thus more appropriate for comparisons with extremes estimated from climate model output, which is often considered to represent areal means (Chen and Knutson, 2008; Gervais et al., 2014; Avila et al., 2015; Di Luca et al., 2020b). In regions with very limited station density (e.g., Africa), the gridded values are closer to point estimates of extremes. The difference in spatial scales among observational data products and model simulations needs to be carefully accounted for when interpreting the comparison among different data products. For example, the average annual maximum daily maximum temperature (TXx) over land computed from the original ERA-Interim reanalysis (at 0.75° resolution) is about 0.4°C warmer than that computed when the ERA-Interim dataset is upscaled to the resolution of 2.5° × 3.75° (Di Luca et al., 2020).Extreme indices computed from various reanalysis data products have been used in some studies, but reanalysis extreme statistics have not been rigorously compared to observations (Donat et al., 2016a).In general, changes in temperature extremes from various reanalyses were most consistent with gridded observations after about 1980, but larger differences were found during the pre-satellite era (Donat et al., 2014b). Overall, lower agreement across reanalysis datasets was found for extreme precipitation changes, although temporal and spatial correlations against observations were found to be still significant. In regions with sparse observations (e.g., Africa and parts of South America), there is generally less agreement for extreme precipitation between different reanalysis products, indicating a consequence of the lack of an observational constraint in these regions (Donat et al., 2014b, 2016a). More recent reanalyses, such as ERA5 (Hersbach et al., 2020), seem to have improved over previous products, at least over some regions (e.g., Mahto and Mishra, 2019; Gleixner et al., 2020; Sheridan et al., 2020). Caution is needed when reanalysis data products are used to provide additional information about past changes in these extremes in regions where observations are generally lacking.Satellite remote sensing data have been used to provide information about precipitation extremes because several products provide data at sub-daily resolution for precipitation, for example, Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM; Maggioni et al., 2016) and clouds, for example, Himawari (Bessho et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2019). However, satellites do not observe the primary atmospheric state variables directly and polar orbiting satellites do not observe any given place at all times. Hence, their utility as a substitute for high-frequency (i.e., daily) ground-based observations is limited. For instance, Timmermans et al. (2019) found little relationship between the timing of extreme daily and five-day precipitation in satellite and gridded station data products over the USA.