Behaviour change by individuals and households requires both motivation to change and capacity for change (option availability/knowledge; material/cognitive resources to initiate and maintain change) (Moser and Ekstrom 2010; Michie et al. 2011) and is best seen as part of more encompassing collective action. Motivation for change for collective good comes from economic, legal, and social incentives, and regard for deeper intrinsic value of concern for others over extrinsic values. Capacity for change varies; people in informal settlements or rural areas are incapacitated by socio-political realities and have limited access to new energy-service options.Motivation and effort required for behaviour change increase from ‘Improve’ to ‘Shift’ to ‘Avoid’ decisions. ‘Improve’ requires changes in personal purchase decisions, ‘Shift’ involves changes in behavioural routines, ‘Avoid’ also involves changes in deeper values or mindsets. People set easy goals for themselves and more difficult ones for others (Attari et al. 2016) and underestimate the energy savings of behaviour changes that make a large difference (Attari et al. 2010). Most personal actions taken so far have small mitigation potential (recycling, ecodriving), and people refrain from options advocated more recently with high impact (less flying, living car free) (Dubois et al. 2019).As individuals pursue a broad set of goals and use calculation-, emotion-, and rule-based processes when they make energy decisions, demand-side policies can use a broad range of behavioural tools that complement subsidies, taxes, and regulations (Chakravarty and Roy 2016; Mattauch et al. 2016; Niamir 2019) ( high evidence, high agreement ). The provision of targeted information, social advertisements, and influence of trusted in-group members and/role models or admired role models like celebrities can be used to create better climate change knowledge and awareness (Niamir 2019; Niamir et al. 2020b; Niamir et al. 2020c). Behavioural interventions like communicating changes in social norms can accelerate behaviour change by creating tipping points (Nyborg et al. 2016). When changes in energy-demand decisions (such as switching to a plant-based diet, (Box 5.5)) are motivated by the creation and activation of a social identity consistent with this and other behaviours, positive spillover can accelerate behaviour change (Truelove et al. 2014), both within a domain or across settings, for example from work to home (Maki and Rothman 2017).