Beyond the very direct links between energy and climate change, reliable, clean, and affordable energy (SDG 7) presents a cross-cutting issue, central to all SDGs and fundamental to development, and energy efficiency enables its provision by reducing the direct supply and necessary infrastructure required. Energy efficiency improvements can be delivered through multiple technical options and tested policies, delivering energy and resource savings simultaneously with other socio-economic and environmental co-benefits. At the macro level, this includes enhancement of energy security (SDG 16, peace, justice and strong institutions) delivered through clean low-carbon energy systems (Fankhauser and Jotzo 2018). Much of the literature, including Sari and Akkaya (2016), Allan et al. (2017) and Garrett-Peltier (2017), points out that energy efficiency improvements deliver superior employment opportunities (SDG 8 – decent work and economic growth), while a limited number of studies have reported that it can negatively impact employment in fuel supply sectors (Costantini et al. 2018).Many studies report that energy efficiency improvements are essential for supporting overall economic growth, contributing to positive changes in multi-factor productivity (SDGs 8 and 9 – decent work and economic growth and industry, innovation, and infrastructure) (Lambert et al. 2014; Bataille and Melton 2017; Rajbhandari and Zhang 2018; Bashmakov 2019; Stern 2019) through industrial innovation (SDG 9) (Kang and Lee 2016), with some dissent (e.g., Mahmood and Ahmad 2018). Improved energy efficiency against a background of growing energy prices helps industrial plants stay competitive (Bashmakov and Myshak 2018). Energy efficiency allows continued economic growth under strong environmental regulation. Given that energy efficiency measures reduce the combustion of fossil fuels it leads to reduced air pollution at industrial sites (Williams et al. 2012) and better indoor comfort at working places.Since less energy supply infrastructure is needed in cities and less energy is needed to produce materials such as cement and concrete, and metals, energy efficiency indirectly supports ‘sustainable cities and communities’ (SDG 11) (Di Foggia 2018). In addition, energy efficiency in industry reflects achievements in meeting SDG 12 (responsible consumption and production).