Some farmers are adapting to drier and warmer conditions through more effective capture of non-growing-season rainfall (e.g., stubble retention to store soil water), improved water use efficiency and matching sowing times and cultivars to the environment (high confidence) (Kirkegaard and Hunt, 2011; Fitzer et al., 2019; Haensch et al., 2021). Observed adaptations include new technologies that improve resource efficiencies, professional knowledge and skills development, new farmer and community networks and diversification of business and household income (Ghahramani et al., 2015; De et al., 2016). For Australian wheat, earlier sowing and longer-season cultivars may increase yield by 2–4% by 2050, with a range of −7 to +2% by 2090 (Wang et al., 2018a). In the wheat industry, breeding for improved reproductive frost tolerance remains a priority (Lobell et al., 2015). Modelling suggests that, since 1990, farm management has held Australian wheat yields constant, but declining rainfall and increasing temperature may have contributed to a 27% decline in simulated potential Australian wheat yield (Hochman et al., 2017).Other observed incremental adaptations include later pruning in the grape industry to spread harvest period and partially restore wine balance, with neutral effects on yield and cost (Moran et al., 2019; Ausseil et al., 2021). The cotton sector increasingly requires shifts in sowing dates to avoid financial impacts (Luo et al., 2017). During years of low water availability, rice growers have been trading water and/or shifting to dry land farming (Mushtaq, 2016).Growers in New Zealand are changing the timing of their operations, growing crops within covered enclosures and purchasing insurance (Cradock-Henry and McKusker, 2015) Teixeira et al. 2018). Investment of capital in irrigation infrastructure has increased (Cradock-Henry et al., 2018a), although its effectiveness as an adaptation depends on water availability (Box 11.5). In industries based on long-lived plants, such as the kiwifruit and grape industries, many of the adaptations (e.g., breeding and growing heat-adapted and disease-resistant varieties) have long lead times and require greater investment than in the cropping sector (Cradock-Henry et al., 2020a). While breeding programmes for traits with enhanced resilience to future climates are beginning, there is little evidence of strategic industry planning (Cradock-Henry et al., 2018a).For drought management, balancing near-term needs with long-term adaptation to increasing aridity is essential (Downing et al., 2016). Insufficient and maladaptive decisions can have far-reaching effects, including changes to resources, infrastructure, services and supply chains to which others must adapt (Fleming et al., 2015; Graham et al., 2018). While there is potential for a greater proportion of agriculture to be located to northern Australia, there are significant and complex agronomic, environmental, institutional, financial and social challenges for successful transformation, including the risk of disruption (medium confidence) (Jakku et al., 2016).