Policy evaluation is a ‘careful, retrospective assessment of merit, worth and value of the administration, output and outcomes of government interventions’ (Vedung 2005). The inherent complexity of climate mitigation policies calls for the application of multiple criteria, and reflexiveness of analysis with regard to governments’ and societies’ objectives for policies (Huitema et al. 2011).Evaluation of climate mitigation policy tends to focus on the environmental effectiveness and economic efficiency or cost-effectiveness of GHG mitigation policies, with distributional equity sometimes as an additional criterion. In policy design and implementation there is rising interest in co-benefits and side-effects of climate policies, as well as institutional requirements for implementation and the potential of policies to have transformative effect on systems. Table 13.2 elaborates.Not all criteria are applicable to all instruments or in all circumstances and the relative importance of different criteria depend on the objectives in the specific the context. a given policy instrument may score highly on only some assessment criteria. In practice, the empirical evidence seldom exists for assessment of a policy instrument across all criteria.Table 13.2 | Criteria for evaluation and assessment of policy instrument s and packages. CriterionDescriptionEnvironmentaleffectivenessReducing GHG emissions is the primary goal of mitigation policies and therefore a fundamental criterion in evaluation. Environmental effectiveness has temporal and spatial dimensions.Economic effectivenessClimate change mitigation policies usually carry economic costs, and/or bring economic benefits other than through avoided future climate change. Economic effectiveness requires minimising costs and maximising benefits.Distributional effectsThe costs and benefits of policies are usually distributed unequally among different groups within a society (Zachmann et al. 2018), for example between industry, consumers, taxpayers; poor and rich households; different industries; different regions and countries. Policy design affects distributional effects, and equity can be taken into account in policy design in order to achieve political support for climate policies (Baranzini et al. 2017).Co-benefits, negative side-effectsClimate change mitigation policies can have effects on other objectives, either positive co-benefits (Mayrhofer and Gupta 2016; Karlsson et al. 2020) or negative side-effects. Conversely, impacts on emissions can arise as side-effects of other policies. There can be various interactions between climate change mitigation and the Sustainable Development Goals (Liu et al. 2019).Institutional requirementsEffective implementation of policies requires that specific institutional prerequisites are met. These include effective monitoring of activities or emissions and enforcement, and institutional structures for the design, oversight and revision and updating of policies. Requirements differ between policy instruments. a separate consideration is the overall feasibility of a policy within a jurisdiction, including political feasibility (Jewell and Cherp 2020).Transformative potentialTransformational change is a process that involves profound change resulting in fundamentally different structures (Nalau and Handmer 2015), or a substantial shift in a system’s underlying structure (Hermwille et al. 2015). Climate change mitigation policies can be seen has having transformative potential if they can fundamentally change emissions trajectories, or facilitate technologies, practices or products with far lower emissions.