Heatwaves happen in the ocean as well as in the atmosphere. Marine heatwaves (MHWs) are extended periods of unusually warm ocean temperatures relative to the typical temperatures for that location and time of year. Due to climate change, the number of days with MHWs has increased by 54% over the past century. These MHWs cause mortalities in a wide variety of marine species, from corals to kelp to seagrasses to fish to seabirds, and have consequent effects on ecosystems and industries like aquaculture and fisheries. Extreme events in the ocean can have damaging effects on marine ecosystems and the human communities that depend on them. The most common form of ocean extremes are MHWs, which are becoming more frequent and intense due to global warming. Because seawater absorbs and releases heat more slowly than air, temperature extremes in the ocean are not as pronounced as over land, but they can persist for much longer, often for weeks to months over areas covering hundreds of thousands of square kilometres. These MHWs can be more detrimental for marine species, in comparison with land species, because marine species are usually adapted to relatively stable temperatures.A commonly used definition of MHWs is a period of at least 5 days whose temperatures are warmer than 90% of the historical records for that location and time of year. Marine heatwaves are described by their abruptness, magnitude, duration, intensity and other metrics. In addition, targeted methods are used to characterize MHWs that threaten particular ecosystems; for example, the accumulated heat stress above typical summer temperatures, described by ‘degree heating weeks’, is used to estimate the likelihood of coral bleaching.Over the past century, MHWs have doubled in frequency, become more intense, lasted for longer and extended over larger areas. Marine heatwaves have occurred in every ocean region over the past few decades, most markedly in association with regional climate phenomena such as the El Niño/Southern Oscillation. During the 2015–2016 El Niño event, 70% of the world’s ocean surface encountered MHWs.Such MHWs cause mortality of a wide variety of marine species, from corals to kelp to seagrasses to fish to seabirds, and they have consequent effects on ecosystems and industries such as mariculture and fisheries. Warm-water coral reefs, estuarine seagrass meadows and cold-temperate kelp forests are among the ecosystems most threatened by MHWs since they are attached to the seafloor (see FAQ 3.2). Unusually warm temperatures cause bleaching and associated death of warm-water corals, which can lead to shifts to low-diversity or algae-dominated reefs, changes in fish communities and deterioration of the physical reef structure, which causes habitat loss and increases the vulnerability of nearby shorelines to large-wave events and SLR. Since the early 1980s, the frequency and severity of mass coral bleaching events have increased sharply worldwide. For example, from 2016 through 2020, the Great Barrier Reef experienced mass coral bleaching three times in 5 years.Mass loss of kelp from MHWs effects on the canopy-forming species has occurred across ocean basins, including the coasts of Japan, Canada, Mexico, Australia and New Zealand. In southern Norway and the northeast USA, mortality from MHWs contributed to the decline of sugar kelp over the past two decades and the spread of turf algal ecosystems that prevent recolonisation by the original canopy-forming species.One of the largest and longest-duration MHWs, nicknamed the ‘Blob’, occurred in the Northeast Pacific Ocean, extending from California north towards the Bering Sea, from 2013 through 2015. Warming from the MHW persisted into 2016 off the West Coast of the USA and into 2018 in the deeper waters of a Canadian fjord. The consequent effects of this expansive MHW included widespread shifts in abundance, distribution and nutritional value of invertebrates and fish, a bloom of toxic algae off the West Coast of the USA that impacted fisheries, the decline of California kelp forests that contributed to the collapse of the abalone fishery, and mass mortality of seabirds.The projected increase in the frequency, severity, duration and areal extent of MHWs threaten many marine species and ecosystems. These MHWs may exceed the thermal limits of species, and they may occur too frequently for the species to acclimate or for populations to recover. The majority of the world’s coral reefs are projected to decline and begin eroding due to more frequent bleaching-level MHWs if the world warms by more than 1.5°C. Recent research suggests possible shifts to more heat-tolerant coral communities but at the expense of species and habitat diversity. Other systems, including kelp forests, are most threatened near the edges of their ranges, although more research is needed into the effect of re-occurring MHWs on kelp forests and other vulnerable systems.The projected ecological impacts of MHWs threaten local communities and Indigenous Peoples, incomes, fisheries, tourism and, in the case of coral reefs, shoreline protection from waves. High-resolution forecasts and early-warning systems, currently most advanced for coral reefs, can help people and industries prepare for MHWs and also collect data on their effects. Identifying and protecting locations and habitats with reduced exposure to MHWs is a key scientific endeavour. For example, corals may be protected from MHWs in tidally stirred waters or in reefs where cooler water upwells from subsurface. Marine protected areas and no-take zones, in addition to terrestrial protection surrounding vulnerable coastal ecosystems, cannot prevent MHWs from occurring. But, depending on the location and adherence by people to restrictions on certain activities, the cumulative effect of other stressors on vulnerable ecosystems can be reduced, potentially helping to enhance the rate of recovery of marine life.Figure FAQ3.2.1 | Impact pathway of a massive extreme marine heatwave, the northwest Pacific ‘Blob’, from causal mechanisms to initial effects, resulting nonlinear effects and the consequent impacts for humans. Lessons learnt from the Blob include the need to advance seasonal forecasts, real-time predictions, monitoring responses, education, possible fisheries impacts and adaptation.Open figure 