The emergence of a climate change signal occurs when that signal exceeds some critical threshold (usually taken to be a measure of natural variability; see for example, Hawkins and Sutton, 2012) or when the probability distribution of an indicator becomes significantly different to that over a reference period (e.g., Chadwick et al., 2019; see also Chapter 10 and Section 1.4.2), in which case external anthropogenic forcings can be detected as causal factors. The ‘time of emergence’ (ToE) or ‘temperature of emergence’ is the time or global warming level thresholds associated with this exceedance. Emergence is particularly relevant to impacts, risk assessment and adaptation because human and natural systems are largely adapted to natural variability but may be vulnerable if exposed to changes that go beyond this variability range; this is not to say that changes within natural variability have no impact, as occurrence of damaging extremes proves. Emergence also informs the timing of adaptation measures. The emergence of a change is always relative to a reference period (e.g., the pre-industrial period or a recent past), depending on the framing question. In the former case, the goal is to estimate the amplitude of an anthropogenically driven change while in the latter, it is to estimate the amplitude of change relative to a baseline that is familiar to stakeholders. Both questions are important for risk assessment, but the former may be more directly interpretable in a mitigation context. The variability also refers to a time scale, generally interannual to inter-decadal. See (Section 1.4.2 and Chapter 10 for more details about how emergence is defined and used in the literature.Table 12.12 | Emergence of CIDs in different time periods, as assessed in this section.  The colour corresponds to the confidence of the region with the highest confidence: white cells indicate where evidence is lacking or the signal is not present, leading to overall low confidence of an emerging signal. Changes in climatic impact-drivers may remain within the range of natural variability or have a time of emergence that varies by region and scenario. This section assesses the evidence for the effects of anthropogenic climate change on the emergence of changes in CID index, past, present and future, as evidenced by the literature assessed in other chapters, as well as additional literature assessed here, at both global and regional scales. In many cases, however, sufficient literature for a robust region-by-region assessment of ToE is lacking. The assessment herein is made by CID. Regional emergence assessment is reported in Tables 12.3–12.11 but is undertaken in this section.Estimations of ToE must be done with caution given the many sources of inherent uncertainties, such as observations representing only a single realization of climate history, internal variability (whose frequency – e.g., annual or decadal – needs to be precisely defined), model biases, and potential low-frequency changes in variability (Chapter 10; Lehner et al., 2017). In addition, a homogeneous interpretation of multiple studies is hampered by heterogeneous methodologies used to calculate emergence. In this section, we assess emergence and its confidence level based on such multiple methods as provided by the literature, and unless specified otherwise, emergence here refers to a signal to noise ration S/N > 1 relative to a pre-industrial baseline and interannual variability (the ‘noise’). Furthermore, observed trends and attribution are taken into account in combination with climate simulations (historical or projections) for assessing whether a trend has already emerged in the historical period.Mean air temperature: Warming of mean annual temperatures has already emerged in all land regions, as obtained from past observations and confirmed by historical simulations (high confidence) (Figure 1.13; King et al., 2015; Hawkins et al., 2020), with S/N ratios larger than two. In the current climate, the highest S/N ratios exceed five over Central Africa, Amazonia, East and South East Asia. Seasonal warming emergence depends on the season. Because the temperature variability in the mid-latitudes is higher in winter than in summer, the emergence of seasonal warming occurs for summer but not for winter in most of this part of the world. In Europe, summer warming has emerged in all regions (medium confidence, medium agreement), and in North America, it has emerged only over Eastern and Western regions while in winter there is low confidence of an emergence in warming in all regions for both Europe and North America (Lehner et al., 2017; Hawkins et al., 2020). When considering the climate of the end of the 20th century (i.e., recent past) as a baseline, the emergence of mean temperature is projected at very different times depending on the scenario. For instance, emergence is reached by 2050 under RCP8.5 in most areas of Europe, Australia or East Asia, but it does not occur within the 21st century under RCP2.6 (medium confidence) (Sui et al., 2014; Im et al., 2021). This means that under RCP2.6, mean temperatures stay within the recent climate variability range observed in the mid-latitudes. However, even under RCP2.6, mean temperatures in tropical regions that have not already emerged are projected to emerge before 2050 (medium confidence).Extreme heat and cold: An increase in heat extremes has emerged or will emerge in the coming three decades in most land regions (high confidence) (Chapter 11; King et al., 2015; Seneviratne and Hauser, 2020), relative to the pre-industrial period, as found by testing significance of differences in distributions of yearly temperature maxima in simulated 20-year periods. In tropical regions, wherever observed changes can be established with statistical significance, and in most mid-latitude regions, there is  high confidence that hot and cold extremes have emerged in the historical period, but only medium confidence elsewhere. In other regions emergence is projected at the latest in the first half of the 21st century under RCP8.5 (high confidence) (King et al., 2015; Seneviratne and Hauser, 2020). Relative to the end of 20th-century conditions, changes in humid heat stress as characterized by wet bulb temperature, indicates a ToE as early as in the first two decades of the 21st century in RCP8.5 at least in many tropical regions (most of Africa in the band 20°S–20°N, South Asia and South East Asia) (medium confidence) (Im et al., 2021). By 2050 and under RCP8.5, wet bulb temperature is projected to emerge in many other areas such as Southern Africa, North Africa, Europe, and most of Central, Southern and Eastern Asia and Northern and Eastern Australia, while under RCP2.6, emergence is either reached later in the century (Europe, Central Asia, Northern Australia), or never reached in the century (Im et al., 2021). Decrease of cold spells has already emerged above the interannual variability in Australasia, Africa and most of Northern South America, and they are projected to emerge before 2050 in the northern mid-latitudes and in Southern South America (King et al., 2015) under RCP8.5 (medium confidence, limited evidence and  high agreement).Mean precipitation: Mean precipitation changes only emerged over a few regions in the historical period (increase in Northern and Eastern Europe and decrease in West Africa and Amazonia) from observations with an S/N ratio larger than one (low confidence) (Hawkins et al., 2020). The emergence of increasing precipitation before the middle of the 21st century is found across scenarios in Siberian regions, Russian Far East, Northern Europe, Arctic regions and the northernmost parts of North America (high confidence) and later in other northern mid-latitude areas, depending on the scenario, albeit with different methods and emergence definitions used in climate projections (Chapter 8; Giorgi and Bi, 2009; Maraun, 2013; King et al., 2015; Akhter et al., 2018; Kumar and Ganguly, 2018; Nguyen et al., 2018; Barrow and Sauchyn, 2019; Rojas et al., 2019; Kusunoki et al., 2020; Pohl et al., 2020; W. Li et al., 2021). Decreases in mean precipitation are projected to emerge in parts of Africa by the middle of the century, and later in the Mediterranean and Southern Australia, but the emergence depends on the scenario, and specific seasons for crop growth (Nguyen et al., 2018; Rojas et al., 2019). Mean precipitation does not emerge in any of these regions at any time in the 21st century under RCP2.6, but emerges in all under RCP8.5. ToE under RCP4.5 is projected to be around 25 years later relative to RCP8.5 in many of the early emergence regions, highlighting the importance of mitigation to gain more time for adaptation.Heavy precipitation and floods: There is low confidence in the emergence of heavy precipitation and pluvial and river flood frequency in observations, despite trends that have been found in a few regions (Chapters 8 and Chapter 11, and across (Section 12.4). In climate projections, the emergence of increase in heavy precipitation strongly depends on the scale of aggregation (Kirchmeier-Young et al., 2019), with, in general, no emergence before a 1.5°C or 2°C warming level, and before the middle of the century (medium confidence), but results depend on the method used for the calculation of the ToE (Maraun, 2013; King et al., 2015; Kusunoki et al., 2020). Emergent increases in heavy precipitation are found in several regions when aggregated at a regional scale in Northern Europe, Northern Asia and East Asia, at latest by the end of the century in SRES A1B or RCP8.5 scenarios or when considering the decadal variability as a reference (medium confidence) (Maraun, 2013; W. Li et al., 2018, 2021; Kusunoki et al., 2020). There have been few emergence studies for streamflow and flooding, although one study showed emergence of different hydrological regimes at different times during the 21st century across the USA (Leng et al., 2016). Variability in extreme streamflows from year to year can be high relative to a trend (Zhuan et al., 2018). Given the heterogeneity of methods and results, there is only low confidence in the emergence of heavy precipitation and flood signals in any region when considering the S/N ratio.Droughts, aridity and fire weather: There is low confidence in the emergence of drought frequency in observations, for any type of drought, in all regions. Even though significant drought trends are observed in several regions with at least medium confidence (Sections 11.6 and 12.4), agricultural and ecological drought indices have interannual variability that dominates trends, as can be seen from their time series (medium confidence) (H. Guo et al., 2018; Spinoni et al., 2019; Haile et al., 2020; M. Wu et al., 2020). Studies of the emergence of drought with systematic comparisons between trends and variability of indices are lacking, precluding a comprehensive assessment of future drought emergence. Historical climate simulations indicate that fire weather indices have already emerged in several regions (the Amazon basin, Mediterranean, Central America, West and Southern Africa) (low confidence, limited evidence) (Abatzoglou et al., 2019), and emergence is projected with low confidence by the middle of the century in several other regions (Southern Australia, Siberia, most of North America and Europe) when considering several indices together.Wind: Observed mean surface wind speed trends are present in many areas (Section 12.4), but the emergence of these trends from the interannual natural variability and their attribution to human-induced climate change remains of low confidence due to various factors such as changes in the type and exposure of recording instruments, and their relation to climate change is not established. For future conditions, there is limited evidence of the emergence of trends in mean wind speeds due to the lack of studies quantifying wind speed changes and their interannual variability. The same limitation also holds for wind extremes (severe storms, tropical cyclones, sand and dust storms).Snow and ice: The decrease in the Northern Hemisphere snow cover extent in spring has already emerged from natural variability (Section 3.4.2). The snow cover duration period is projected to emerge over large parts of Eastern and Western North America and Europe by the mid-century both in spring and autumn, and emergence is expected in the second half of the 21st century in the Arctic regions in the high RCP8.5 scenario (medium confidence) (Chapter 9, SROCC). For snow depth or snow water equivalent, there is low confidence (limited evidence) of the emergence of a decrease before 2050 because climate change also increases the variability of the snow depth signal, for example in Europe (Section 3.4.2; Willibald et al., 2020). Terrestrial permafrost is warming worldwide due to climate change (Sections 2.3.2.5 and 9.5.2). Due to weak interannual variability of permafrost temperatures, terrestrial permafrost warming has emerged above natural variability in almost all observed time series of the Northern Hemisphere (medium confidence, limited evidence,  high agreement) (Biskaborn et al., 2019), but the active layer thickness exhibits considerable interannual variability inhibiting evidence for emergence (Chapter 9).Sea ice:  Sea ice area decrease in the Arctic in all seasons has already emerged from the interannual variability (high confidence) (Chapter 9). By contrast, the Antarctic sea ice area shows no significant trend, and therefore no emergence.For other snow and ice CIDs (heavy snowfall and ice storm, hail, snow avalanche), there is limited evidence of emerging signals.Relative sea level, coastal flood and coastal erosion: Near-coast RSLR will emerge before 2050 for RCP4.5 along the coasts of all AR6 regions (with coasts) except East Asia, the Russian Far East, Madagascar, the southern part of Eastern North America and the Antarctic regions (medium confidence) (Section 9.6.1.4; Bilbao et al., 2015). Under RCP8.5, emergence of near-coast RSLR is projected by mid-century along the coasts of all AR6 regions (with coasts), except WAN where emergence is projected to occur before 2100 (Section 9.6.1.4; Lyu et al., 2014) (medium confidence). Emergence studies for ETWL and coastal erosion are lacking and hence it is not currently possible to robustly assess emergence in these CIDs.Mean ocean temperature and marine heatwave: The emergence of the sea surface temperature increase signal has been observed in global oceans over the last century, and the largest S/N values are found in the tropical Atlantic and tropical Indian oceans (Hawkins et al., 2020). There is  high confidence in the widespread occurrence of marine heatwaves in all basins and marginal seas over the last decades (Chapter 9), but the emergence of this signal above the natural variability has not yet been addressed in detail.Ocean acidity, ocean salinity and dissolved oxygen: The global ocean pH decline has very likely emerged from natural variability for more than 95% of the global open ocean (SROCC, Chapter 2). The regional signals are more variable, but in all ocean basins, the signal of ocean acidification in the surface ocean is projected to emerge in the early 21st century (Chapter 5). The mean ToE for acidity in the coastal subtropical to temperate north-east Pacific and north-west Atlantic is above two decades (high agreement, medium evidence) (Section 5.3.5.2). Salinity change signals have already emerged with 20–45% of the zonally averaged basin in the Atlantic, 20–55% in the Pacific and 25–50% in the Indian oceans and will be reaching 35–55% in the Atlantic in 2050 to 55–65% in 2080; 45–65% to 60–75% in the Pacific; and 45–65% to 60–80% in the Indian oceans (Chapter 9; Silvy et al., 2020). Deoxygenization has already emerged in many open oceans. The signal is most evident in the Pacific and Southern oceans but not evident in the North Atlantic Ocean (Andrews et al., 2013; Levin, 2018). However, there is medium confidence in the emergence of the anthropogenic signal in many other oceanic regions by 2050 (Henson et al., 2017; Levin, 2018).There is  high confidence   that several CID changes have already emerged above historical period natural variability in many regions (e.g., mean temperature in most regions, heat extremes in tropical areas, sea ice, salinity). Heat and cold CIDs (excluding frost) that have not already emerged will emerge by 2050 whatever the scenario in almost all land regions  (medium confidence). The emergence of increasing precipitation before the middle of the century is also projected in Siberian regions, Russian Far East, Northern Europe and the northernmost parts of North America and Arctic regions across scenarios with the various methods and emergence definitions used  (high confidence). Studies are missing to properly assess S/N emergence for droughts and for wind CIDs. Arctic sea ice extent declines have mostly emerged above noise level  (medium to  high confidence), and the emergence of declining snow cover is expected by the end of the century under RCP8.5. There is  medium confidence   that, under RCP8.5, the anthropogenic forced signal in near-coast relative sea level change will emerge by mid-century in all regions with coasts, except in the West Antarctic region where emergence is projected to occur before 2100. In all ocean basins, the signal of ocean acidification in the surface ocean is projected to emerge before 2050  (high confidence). 