Better understanding is required on: (i) more detailed causal mechanisms in the mutual interactions between individual, social, and structural drivers of change and how these vary over time, that is, what is their relative importance in different transition phases; (ii) how narratives associated with specific technologies, group identities, and climate change influence each other and interact over time to enable and constrain mitigation outcomes; (iii) how social media influences the development and impacts of narratives about low-carbon transitions; (iv) the effects of social movements (for climate justice, youth climate activism, fossil fuel divestment, and climate action more generally) on social norms and political change, especially in less developed countries; (v) how existing provisioning systems and social practices destabilise through the weakening of various lock-in mechanisms, and resulting deliberate strategies for accelerating demand-side transitions; (vi) a dynamic understanding of feasibility, which addresses the dynamic mechanisms that lower barriers or drive mitigation options over the barriers; (vii) how shocks like prolonged pandemic impact willingness and capacity to change and their permanency for various social actors and country contexts. The debate on the most powerful leverage points and policies for speeding up change in social and technological systems need to be resolved with more evidence. Discussion on the policy interdependence and implications of end-user and efficiency focused strategies have only just started suggesting an important area for future research.Table 5.7 | Examples of policies to enable‘Improve’optionsMitigation optionPerceived struggles to overcomePolicy to overcome struggles (Incentives)  Lightweight vehicles, hydrogen cars, electric vehicles, ecodrivingAdequate infrastructure may be absent, speed a part of modern lifeMonetary incentives and traffic regulations favouring electric vehicles; investment in public charging infrastructure; car purchase tax calculated by a combination of weight, CO2 and NOx emissions (Haugneland and Kvisle 2015; Globisch et al. 2018; Gnann et al. 2018; Lieven and Rietmann 2018; Rietmann and Lieven 2019)Use low-carbon materials in dwelling designManufacturing and R&D costs, recycling processes and aesthetic performance (Orsini and Marrone 2019). Access to secondary materials in the building sector (Nußholz et al. 2019)Increasing recycling of construction and demolition waste; incentives must be available to companies in the waste collection and recovery markets to offer recovered material at higher value (Nußholz et al. 2019)Better insulation and retrofitting–Policies to advance retrofitting and GHG emission reductions in buildings are laden with high expectations since they are core components of politically ambitious city climate targets (Haug et al. 2010)–Building owners’ to implement measures identified in auditing results–Lack of incentive for building owners to invest in higher efficiency than required norms (Trencher et al. 2016)Grants and loans through development banks, building and heating system labels, and technical renovation requirements to continuously raise standards (Ortiz et al. 2019; Sebi et al. 2019); disclosure of energy use, financing and technical assistance (Sebi et al. 2019)Widen low-carbon energy accessAccess to finance, capacity, robust policies, affordability for poor households for off-grid solutions until recently (Rolffs et al. 2015; Fuso Nerini et al. 2018; Mulugetta et al. 2019)Feed-in tariffs and auctions to stimulate investment. Pay-as-you-go end-user financing scheme where customers pay a small up-front fee for the equipment, followed by monthly payments, using mobile payment system (Rolffs et al. 2015; Yadav et al. 2019)Improve illumination-related emissionLack of supply-side solutions for low-carbon electricity provisionBuilding energy codes that set building standards; grants and other incentives for R&DImprove efficiency of cooking appliancesReliability of power in many countries is not guaranteed; electricity tariff is high in many countries; cooking appliances are mostly imported using scarce foreign currencyDriven by a combination of government support for appliance purchases, shifting subsidies from kerosene or LPG to electricity; community-level consultation and awareness campaigns about the hazards associated with indoor air pollution from the use of fuelwood, coal and kerosene, as well as education on the multiple benefits of electric cooking (Martínez-Gómez et al. 2016; Yangka and Diesendorf 2016; Martínez et al. 2017; Gould and Urpelainen 2018; Dendup and Arimura 2019; Pattanayak et al. 2019)Shift to LED lampsPeople spend increasing amounts of time indoors, with heavy dependence on and demand for artificial lighting (Ding et al. 2020)Government incentives, utility incentive (Bertoldi et al. 2021). EU bans on directional and non-directional halogen bulbs (Franceschini et al. 2018)Solar water heatingDominance of incumbent energy source i.e., electricity; cheap conventional energy; high initial investment costs and long payback (Joubert et al. 2016)Subsidy for solar heaters (Li et al. 2013; Bessa and Prado 2015; Sgouridis et al. 2016)