Chapters 5 to 11 assess outcomes from mitigation measures that are applicable in individual sectors, and potential co-benefits and adverse side effects of these individual measures. Chapter 12 brings together the cross-sectoral aspects of these assessments including synergies and trade-offs as well as the implications of measures that have application in more than one sector and measures whose implementation in one sector impacts implementation in other sectors.Taking stock of the sectoral mitigation assessments, Chapter 12 provides a summary synthesis of sectoral mitigation costs and potentials in the short and long term along with comparison to the top-down integrated assessment model (IAM) assessment literature of Chapter 3 and the national/regional assessment literature of Chapter 4.In the context of cross-sectoral synergies and trade-offs, the chapter identifies a number of mitigation measures that have application in more than one sector. Examples include measures involving product and material circularity, which contribute to mitigation of GHG emissions in a number of ways, such as treatment of organic waste to reduce methane emissions, avoid emissions through generation of renewable energy, and reduce emissions through substitution of synthetic fertilisers. Low-carbon energy technologies such as solar and wind may be used for grid electricity supply, as embedded generation in the buildings sector (e.g., rooftop solar) and for energy supply in the agriculture sector. Nuclear and bio-based thermal electric generation can provide multiple synergies including base load to augment solar and wind, district heating, and seawater desalination. Grid-integrated hydrogen systems can buffer variability of solar and wind power and are being explored as a mitigation option in the transport and industry sectors. Carbon capture and storage (CCS) has potential application in a number of industrial processes (cement, iron and steel, petroleum refining and pulp and paper) and the fossil fuel electricity sector. When coupled with energy recovery from biomass (BECCS), CCS can help to provide CO2 removal from the atmosphere. On the demand side, electric vehicles are also considered an option for balancing variable power, energy efficiency options find application across the sectors, as does reducing demand for goods and services, and improving material use efficiency. Focused inquiry into these areas of cross-sectoral perspectives is provided for CDR, food systems, and land-based mitigation options.A range of examples of where mitigation measures result in cross-sectoral interactions and integration is identified. The mitigation potential of electric vehicles, including plug-in hybrids, is linked to the extent of decarbonisation of the electricity grid, as well as to the liquid fuel supply emissions profile. Making buildings energy positive, where excess energy is used to charge vehicles, can increase the potential of electric and hybrid vehicles. Advanced process control and process optimisation in industry can reduce energy demand and material inputs, which in turn can reduce emissions linked to resource extraction and manufacturing. Trees and green roofs planted to counter urban heat islands reduce the demand for energy for air conditioning and simultaneously sequester carbon. Material and product circularity contributes to mitigation, such as treatment of organic waste to reduce methane emissions, generate renewable energy, and to substitute for synthetic fertilisers.The chapter also discusses cross-sectoral mitigation potential related to diffusion of general-purpose technologies (GPT), such as electrification, digitalisation, and hydrogen. Examples include the use of hydrogen as an energy carrier, which, when coupled with low-carbon energy, has potential for driving mitigation in energy, industry, transport, and buildings (Box 12.5), and digitalisation has the potential for reducing GHG emissions through energy savings across multiple sectors.The efficient realisation of the above examples of cross-sectoral mitigation would require careful design of government interventions across planning, policy, finance, governance, and capacity building fronts. In this respect, Chapter 12 assesses literature on cross-sectoral integrated policies, cross-sectoral financing solutions, cross-sectoral spillovers and competitiveness effects, and on cross-sectoral governance for climate change mitigation.Finally, in the context of cross-sectoral synergies and trade-offs, the chapter assesses the non-climate mitigation co-benefits and adverse effects in relation to SDGs, building on the fast-growing literature on the non-climate impacts of mitigation.