There is still some debate on what qualifies as adaptation finance and how such finance should be measured (UNFCCC, 2016). According to the Climate Policy Initiative, adaptation finance is ‘finance with the aim of improving preparation and reducing climate-related risk and damage, for both human and natural systems, as short-term climate impacts will continue to exact economic, social, and environmental costs even if appropriate mitigation actions are taken’ (CPI, 2019). According to UNEP, the annual costs of adaptation in developing countries could range from USD 140 billion to USD 300 billion by 2030. Globally, adaptation costs are estimated to be even greater, with up to USD 500 billion yr −1 by 2050 under a Business-As-Usual scenario (UNEP, 2021). While global climate finance flows reached USD 579 billion on average over the 2017/18 period, there has been a continued heavy imbalance in favour of mitigation finance, with adaptation finance totalling around USD 30 billion (compared to USD 532 billion for mitigation), or 5% of tracked climate finance. The World Bank has, however, committed to increase direct adaptation finance to USD 50 billion over the 2020–25 period, putting the Bank’s adaptation finance in developing countries on par with its mitigation investments (World Bank, 2019a). Adaptation finance is also growing alongside finance for actions with both mitigation and adaptation benefits, for example in forestry or agriculture, which rose to just over USD 12 billion (CPI, 2019), as well as increasing focus on adaptation and cross-sectoral projects. Looking only at climate finance flows from developed to developing countries, the OECD estimates a total of USD 78.9 billion mobilised in 2018, with mitigation accounting for 70% (USD 55 billion) of the total, adaptation 21% (USD 16.8 billion) and cross-cutting finance making up the remainder (OECD, 2020a).Adaptation finance funds actions to adapt to the impacts of climate change, yet such actions are heavily context, scale and time specific. Many mitigation actions in the energy sector can be easily quantified and employed across different jurisdictions. For example, solar photovoltaic (PV) presents an established way across a multitude of countries to produce low-carbon energy at a profit and reduce global GHG emissions. Adaptation needs, however, vary greatly from location to location and short-term solutions, for example investments in irrigation technologies to improve water availability for specific crops in a growing season, may differ from longer-term solutions, for example, switching to different crops altogether. Benefits are not always easily quantified and often accrue to local communities over time rather than to investors looking for the kind of returns realised in mitigation actions.Development finance institutions mainly draw on market-rate loans and, to a lesser extent, concessional lending and grants to finance adaptation actions. There are regional differences in the choice of instruments, too, owing to the degree of economic development: while most of the adaptation finance flowing to the Asia-Pacific is market-rate debt, the vast majority of adaptation finance flowing to sub-Saharan Africa is in the form of concessional debt or grants (Richmond et al., 2020).Globally, the main sectors benefiting from adaptation finance to date include water and waste water management; agriculture, forestry, land use and natural resource management; disaster risk management; and infrastructure, energy, and other built environment (Oliver et al., 2018). In recent years, this finance has moved away from concentrating on water and wastewater management to spread out more evenly across the sectors. Between 2015/16 and 2017/18, investment in water and wastewater management dropped from USD 11 billion to USD 9 billion, while investment in agriculture, forestry, land use and natural resource management grew from USD 5 billion to USD 7 billion, and investment in disaster risk management more than doubled from USD 3 billion to USD 7 billion (CPI, 2019). In addition, while mitigation actions are more easily delineated, for example wind farms in the energy sector, adaptation measures often need to be mainstreamed across a number of sectors and investment decisions.There are strong interconnections between NBS, climate adaptation and mitigation actions. Ecosystem-based adaptation is a nature-based solution that uses ecosystem services to help communities adapt to climate change. Examples of such approaches were covered in Section 8.5.2.2. For example, mangrove restoration provides both climate mitigation (as carbon sinks) and adaptation to climate change (increasing the resilience of coastal communities), while also supporting the implementation of a range of other SDGs (e.g., through increased food security). Research has found that without mangroves, global flood damage costs would increase by more than USD 65 billion a year (Menéndez et al., 2020). There is, therefore, an urgent need to invest in a range of NBS.