As noted previously, a more qualitative approach is followed and less quantitative information is presented for 2050. The sectoral results are summarised in Table 12.5. In addition to the many technologies that already play a role by 2030 (Table 12.3) additional technologies may be needed for deep decarbonisation, for example for managing power systems with high shares of intermittent renewable sources and for providing new fuels and associated infrastructure for sectors that are hard to decarbonise. New processes also play an important role, notably for industrial processes. In general, stronger sector coupling is needed, particularly increased integration of energy end use and supply sectors.Table 12.5 | Mitigation options and their characteristics for 2050. SectorMajor optionsDegree to which net zero-GHG is possibleEnergy sector.Range of supply-side options possible (see 2030 overview).Increased share of electricity in final energy use.Potentially important role for hydrogen, ammonia, etc.Zero CO2 energy system is possible.Agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU).Options comparable to those in 2030. Permanence is important.Some hard-to-abate activities will still have positive emissions, but for the sector as a whole, net negative emissions are possible through carbon sequestration in agriculture and forestry.Buildings.Sufficiency, high performance new and existing buildings with efficient heating, ventilation, and air conditioning, especially heat pumps, building management and operation, efficient appliances, and onsite renewables backed up with demand flexibility and digitalisation measures.At least 8.2 GtCO2 or 61% reduction, as compared to the baseline is possible with options on the demand side. This is a low estimate, because in some developing regions literature is not sufficient to derive a comprehensive estimate. Nearly net zero CO2 emissions is possible if grid electricity will also be decarbonised. Carbon storage in buildings provides CDR.Transport.Electrification can become a major option for many transport modes. For long-haul trucking, ships and aviation, in addition biofuels, hydrogen and potentially synthetic fuels can be applied.To a large extent if the electricity sector is fully decarbonised and the deployment of alternative fuels for long-haul trucking, aviation and shipping is successful.Industry.Stronger role for material efficiency and recycling.Full decarbonisation through new processes; CCS, CCU and hydrogen can become dominant.Approx. 85% reduction is possible. Net zero CO2 emissions is possible with retrofitting and early retirement.Cross-sectoral.Direct air carbon capture and storage.Enhanced weathering.Ocean-based methods.Contributes CDR to support net zero GHG by counterbalancing sectoral emissions.