This chapter engages with understanding CRD and the pathways to achieving it by building on the concepts introduced in Chapter 1 of this Working Group II report, as well as the regional and sectoral context presented in other chapters (Section 18.5). Notably, this chapter takes off where Chapters 16 and 17 end: recognising the significance of the representative key risks for CRD and the decision making context of different actors who are implementing policies and practices to pursue different CRD pathways and manage climate risk. Therefore, this chapter assesses options for pursuing CRD and the broader system transitions and enabling conditions in support of CRD.This chapter hosts three Cross-Chapter Boxes, which have their natural home here. The Cross-Chapter Box on Gender, Justice and Transformative Pathways (Cross-Chapter Box GENDER) assesses literature specifically on gender and climate change to uncover the importance of a justice focus to facilitate transformative pathways, both towards CRD, as well as a means to achieving gender equity and social justice. The Cross-Chapter Box on The Role of Indigenous Knowledge in Understanding and Adapting to Climate Change (Cross-Chapter Box INDIG) highlights that achieving CRD requires confronting the uncertainty of a climate change future. There are many perspectives about what future is desired and how to reach it. Integrating multiple forms of knowledge is a strategy to build resilience and develop institutional arrangements that provide temporary solutions able to satisfy competing interests (Grove, 2018). Indigenous knowledge is proven to enhance resilience in multiple contexts (e.g., Chowdhooree, 2019; Inaotombi and Mahanta, 2019). Meanwhile, Cross-Chapter Box FEASIB acts as an appendix to the WGII report, synthesising information on the feasibility associated with different adaptation options for reducing risk.In assessing the opportunities and constraints associated with the pursuit of sustainable development, this chapter proceeds in Section 18.2 to assess the links between sustainable development and climate action, including examination of current patterns of development and consideration for synergies and trade-offs among different strategies and options. Then, in Section 18.3, the chapter assesses five systems transitions to identify the shifts in development that would enable CRD. Section 18.4 assesses the role of different actors in the pursuit of CRD as well as the public and private arenas in which they engage. Section 18.5 synthesises CRD assessments from different WGII sectoral and regional chapters to identify commonalities and differences. The chapter concludes in Section 18.6 with a summary of key opportunities for enhancing the knowledge needed to enable different actors to pursue CRD.