Climate change is expected to have adverse impacts on well-being, some of which will become serious enough to threaten mental health (very high confidence). However, changes (Hayes and Poland, 2018) in extreme events due to climate change, including floods (Baryshnikova, 2019), droughts (Carleton, 2017) and hurricanes (Kessler et al., 2008; Boscarino et al., 2013, Boscarino et al., 2017; Obradovich et al., 2018), which are projected to increase due to climate change, directly worsen mental health and well-being and increase anxiety (high confidence). Projections suggest that sub-Saharan African children and adolescents, particularly girls, are extremely vulnerable to negative direct and indirect impacts on their mental health and well-being (Atkinson and Bruce, 2015; Owen et al., 2016). The direct risks are greatest for people with existing mental disorders, physical injuries, and compromised respiratory, cardiovascular and reproductive systems, with indirect impacts potentially arising from displacement, migration, famine and malnutrition, degradation or destruction of health and social care systems, conflict, and climate-related economic and social losses (high to very high confidence) (Burke et al., 2018; Curtis et al., 2017; Hayes et al., 2018; Serdeczny et al., 2017; Watts et al., 2019). Demographic factors increasing vulnerability include age, gender and low socioeconomic status, though the effect of these will vary depending on the specific manifestation of climate change; overall, climate change is predicted to increase inequality in mental health across the globe (Cianconi et al., 2020). Based on evidence assessed in Section 7.2, future direct impacts of increased heat risks and associated illnesses can be expected to have negative implications for mental health and well-being, with outcomes being highly mediated by adaptation, but there are no assessable studies that quantify such risks. There may be some benefits to mental health and well-being associated with fewer very cold days in the winter; however, research is inconsistent. Any positive effect associated with reduced low-temperature days is projected to be outweighed by the negative effects of increased high temperatures (Cianconi et al., 2020).Human behaviours and systems will be disrupted by climate change in a myriad of ways, and the potential consequences for mental health and well-being are correspondingly large in number and complex in mechanism (high confidence). For example, climate change may alter human physical activity and mobility patterns, in turn producing alterations in the mental health statuses promoted by regular physical activity (Obradovich and Fowler, 2017; Obradovich and Rahwan, 2019). Climate change may affect labour capacity, because heat can compromise the ability to engage in manual labour as well as cognitive functioning, with impacts on the economic status of individual households as well as societies (Kjellstrom et al., 2016; Liu, 2020). Migrations and displacement caused by climate change may worsen the well-being of those affected (Vins et al., 2015; Missirian and Schlenker, 2017). Climate change is expected to increase aggression through both direct and indirect mechanisms, with one study predicting a 6% increase in homicides globally for a 1°C temperature increase, although noting significant variability across countries (Mares and Moffett, 2016). Broad societal outcomes such as economic unrest, political conflict or governmental dysfunction assessed in Section 7.3.5 may undermine the mental health of populations in the future (medium confidence). Food insecurity presents its own severe risks for mental health and cognitive function (Jones, 2017).