‘Improve’ policies focus on the efficiency and enhancement of technological performance of services (Table 5.7). In mobility services, ‘Improve’ policies aim at improving vehicles, comfort, fuels, transport operations and management technologies; and in buildings, they include policies for improving efficiency of heating systems and retrofitting existing buildings. Efficiency improvements in electric cooking appliances, together with the ongoing decrease in prices of renewable energy technologies, are opening policy opportunities to support households to adopt electrical cooking at mass scale (medium evidence, medium agreement ) (IEA 2017c; Puzzolo et al. 2019). These actions towards cleaner energy for cooking often come with cooking-related reduction of GHG emissions, even though the extent of the reductions is highly dependent on context and technology and fuel pathways ( high evidence, high agreement ) (Martínez et al. 2017; Mondal et al. 2018; Rosenthal et al. 2018; Serrano-Medrano et al. 2018; Dagnachew et al. 2019) (Box 5.6).Table 5.7 highlights the significant progress made in the uptake of the electrical vehicle (EV) in Europe, driven by a suite of incentives and policies. Increased activity in widening electric vehicle use is also occurring in developing countries. The Indian Government’s proposal to reach the target of a 100% electric vehicle fleet by 2030 has stimulated investment in charging infrastructure that can facilitate diffusion of larger EVs (Dhar et al. 2017). Although the proposal was not converted into a policy, India’s large and growing two-wheeler market has benefitted from the policy attention on EVs, showing a significant potential for increasing the share of electric two- and three-wheelers in the short term (Ahmad and Creutzig 2019 ). Similar opportunities exist for China, where e-bikes have replaced car trips and are reported to act as intermediate links in multimodal mobility (Cherry et al. 2016).In recent years, policy interest has arisen to address the energy access challenge in Africa using low-carbon energy technologies to meet energy for poverty reduction and climate action simultaneously (Rolffs et al. 2015; Fuso Nerini et al. 2018; Mulugetta et al. 2019). This aspiration has been bolstered on the technical front by significant advances in appliance efficiency such as light-emitting diode (LED) technology, complemented by the sharp reduction in the cost of renewable energy technologies, and largely driven by market-stimulating policies and public R&D to mitigate risks ( high evidence, high agreement ) (Alstone et al. 2015; Zubi et al. 2019).