AR5 introduced the concept of limits to adaptation and provided a functional definition that has been used in subsequent Special Reports (SR15, SROCC, SRCCL) and is also used for AR6 (see also Chapter 1).A limit is defined as the point at which an actor’s objectives or system’s needs cannot be secured from intolerable risks through adaptive actions (Klein et al., 2014). Tolerable risks are those where adaptation needed to keep risk within reasonable levels is possible, while intolerable risks are those where practicable or affordable adaptation options to avoid unreasonable risks are unavailable. This highlights that limits to adaptation are socially constructed and based on values that determine levels of reasonable or unreasonable risk as well as on available adaptation options, which vary greatly across and within societies.Limits are categorised as being either ‘soft’ or ‘hard’. Soft limits may change over time as additional adaptation options that are practicable or affordable become available. Hard limits will not change over time as no additional adaptive actions are possible. When a limit is exceeded, then intolerable risk may materialise and the actor’s objectives or system’s needs may be either abandoned or transformed (Box 16.2).For human systems, soft and hard limits are largely distinguished by whether or not constraints to adaptation are able to be overcome. Constraints to adaptation (also called barriers) are factors that make it harder to plan and implement adaptation actions, such as limited financial resources, ineffective institutional arrangements or insufficient human capacity. Soft limits are mostly associated with human systems, due in part to the role of human agency in addressing constraints. For natural systems, the magnitude and rate of climate change and capacity of adaptation to such change largely determine the type of limit. Hard limits are largely associated with natural systems and are mostly due to inability to adapt to biophysical changes.Using this understanding of limits, subsequent Special Reports have assessed relevant literature (Mechler et al., 2020). SR15 identifies several regions, sectors and ecosystems—including coral reefs, biodiversity, human health, coastal livelihoods, Small Island Developing States, and the Arctic—that are projected to experience limits at either 1.5°C or 2°C. SRCCL states that land degradation due to climate change may result in limits to adaptation being reached in coastal regions and areas affected by thawing permafrost. SROCC details that risks of climate-related changes in the ocean and cryosphere may result in limits for ecosystems and vulnerable communities in coral reef environments, urban atoll islands and low-lying Arctic locations before the end of this century in case of high-emissions scenarios.A key area of advancement since AR5 is how incremental adaptation and transformational adaptation relate to limits to adaptation. Incremental adaptation maintains ‘the essence and integrity of a system or process at a given scale’, while transformational adaptation ‘changes the fundamental attributes of a social-ecological system’ (IPCC, 2018b). Both incremental and transformational adaptation may expand the adaptive possibilities for a system, providing additional adaptation options after a system reaches a soft limit (Felgenhauer, 2015; Pelling et al., 2015; Termeer et al., 2017, see also Chapters 1 and 17; Alston et al., 2018; Panda, 2018; Mechler and Deubelli, 2021). However, it is critical to note that adaptation, whether incremental or transformational, must support securing an actor’s objectives or system’s needs from intolerable risks. Once objectives or needs have been abandoned or transformed, a limit to adaptation has occurred. However, objectives or needs may change over time as values of a society change (Taebi et al., 2020), thus adding further complexity to assessing limits to adaptation.