The forcing and response energy budget framework provides a methodology to assess the effect of individual drivers of global surface temperature response, and to facilitate the understanding of the key phenomena that set the magnitude of this temperature response. The framework used here is developed from that adopted in previous IPCC reports (see Ramaswamy et al., 2019 for a discussion). Effective Radiative Forcing (ERF), introduced in AR5 (Boucher et al., 2013; Myhre et al., 2013b) is more explicitly defined in this Report and is employed as the central definition of radiative forcing (Sherwood et al., 2015, Box 7.1, Figure 1a). The framework has also been extended to allow variations in feedbacks over different time scales and with changing climate state (Sections 7.4.3 and 7.4.4).The global surface air temperature (GSAT) response to perturbations that give rise to an energy imbalance is traditionally approximated by the following linear energy budget equation, in which ΔN represents the change in the top-of-atmosphere (TOA) net energy flux, ΔF is an effective radiative forcing perturbation to the TOA net energy flux,  α  is the net feedback parameter and ΔT is the change in  GSAT:ΔN =ΔF + α ΔTERF is the TOA energy budget change resulting from the perturbation, excluding any radiative response related to a change in GSAT (i.e., ΔT= 0). Climate feedbacks ( α ) represent those processes that change the TOA energy budget in response to a given ΔT.The effective radiative forcing, ERF(ΔF; units: W m–2) quantifies the change in the net TOA energy flux of the Earth system due to an imposed perturbation (e.g., changes in greenhouse gas or aerosol concentrations, in incoming solar radiation, or land-use change). ERF is expressed as a change in net downward radiative flux at the TOA following adjustments in both tropospheric and stratospheric temperatures, water vapour, clouds, and some surface properties, such as surface albedo from vegetation changes, that are uncoupled to any GSAT change (Smith et al., 2018b). These adjustments affect the TOA energy balance and hence the ERF. They are generally assumed to be linear and additive (Section 7.3.1). Accounting for such processes gives an estimate of ERF that is more representative of the climate change response associated with forcing agents than stratospheric-temperature-adjusted radiative forcing (SARF) or the instantaneous radiative forcing (IRF; Section 7.3.1). Adjustments are processes that are independent of GSAT change, whereas feedbacks refer to processes caused by GSAT change. Although adjustments generally occur on time scales of hours to several months, and feedbacks respond to ocean surface temperature changes on time scales of a year or more, time scale is not used to separate the definitions. ERF has often been approximated as the TOA energy balance change due to an imposed perturbation in climate model simulations with sea surface temperature and sea-ice concentrations set to their pre-industrial climatological values (e.g., Forster et al., 2016). However, to match the adopted forcing–feedback framework, the small effects of any GSAT change from changes in land surface temperatures need to be removed from the TOA energy balance in such simulations to give an approximate measure of ERF (Box 7.1, Figure 1b and (Section 7.3.1).Box 7.1, Figure 1 | Schematics of the forcing–feedback framework adopted within the assessment, following Equation 7.1. The figure illustrates how the Earth’s top-of-atmosphere (TOA) net energy flux might evolve for a hypothetical doubling of atmospheric CO2 concentration above pre-industrial levels, where an initial positive energy imbalance (energy entering the Earth system, shown on the y-axis) is gradually restored towards equilibrium as the surface temperature warms (shown on the x-axis).  (a)  illustrates the definitions of effective radiative forcing (ERF) for the special case of a doubling of atmospheric CO2 concentration, the feedback parameter and the equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS).  (b) illustrates how approximate estimates of these metrics are made within the chapter and how these approximations might relate to the exact definitions adopted in panel (a).Open figureThe feedback parameter,  α (units: W m–2°C–1) quantifies the change in net energy flux at the TOA for a given change in GSAT. Many climate variables affect the TOA energy budget, and the feedback parameter can be decomposed, to first order, into a sum of termswhere x represents a variable of the Earth system that has a direct effect on the energy budget at the TOA. The sum of the feedback terms (i.e.,  α in Equation 7.1) governs Earth’s equilibrium GSAT response to an imposed ERF. In previous assessments,  α and the related ECS have been associated with a distinct set of physical processes (Planck response and changes in water vapour, lapse rate, surface albedo, and clouds; Charney et al., 1979). In this assessment, a more general definition of α and ECS is adopted such that they include additional Earth system processes that act across many time scales (e.g., changes in natural aerosol emissions or vegetation). Because, in our assessment, these additional processes sum to a near-zero value, including these additional processes does not change the assessed central value of ECS but does affect its assessed uncertainty range (Section 7.4.2). Note that there is no standardized notation or sign convention for the feedback parameter in the literature. Here the convention is used that the sum of all feedback terms (the net feedback parameter,  α ) is negative for a stable climate that radiates additional energy to space with a GSAT increase, with a more negative value of α  corresponding to a stronger radiative response and thus a smaller GSAT change required to balance a change in ERF (Equation 7.1).A change in process x amplifies the temperature response to a forcing when the associated feedback parameter α x is positive (positive feedback) and dampens the temperature response when α x is negative (negative feedback). New research since AR5 emphasizes how feedbacks can vary over different time scales (Section 7.4.4) and with climate state (Section 7.4.3), giving rise to the concept of an ‘effective feedback parameter’ that may be different from the equilibrium value of the feedback parameter governing ECS (Section 7.4.3).The equilibrium climate sensitivity, ECS (units: °C), is defined as the equilibrium value of ΔT in response to a sustained doubling of atmospheric CO2 concentration from a pre-industrial reference state. The value of ERF for this scenario is denoted by ΔF2xCO2, giving ECS = –ΔF2xCO2/ α  from Equation 7.1 applied at equilibrium (Box 7.1, Figure 1a and (Section 7.5). ‘Equilibrium’ refers to a steady state where ΔN averages to zero over a multi-century period. ECS is representative of the multi-century to millennial ΔTresponse to ΔF2xCO2, and is based on a CO2 concentration change so any feedbacks that affect the atmospheric concentration of CO2 do not influence its value. As employed here, ECS also excludes the long-term response of the ice sheets (Section 7.4.2.6) which may take multiple millennia to reach equilibrium, but includes all other feedbacks. Due to a number of factors, studies rarely estimate ECS or α at equilibrium or under CO2 forcing alone. Rather, they give an‘effective feedback parameter’ (Section 7.4.1 and Box 7.1, Figure 1b) or an ‘effective ECS’ (Section 7.5.1 and Box 7.1, Figure 1b), which represent approximations to the true values of α orECS. The ‘effective ECS’ represents the equilibrium value of ΔT in response to a sustained doubling of atmospheric CO2 concentration that would occur assuming the ‘effective feedback parameter’ applied at that equilibrium state. For example, a feedback parameter can be estimated from the linear slope of Δn against ΔTover a set number of years within ESM simulations of an abrupt doubling or quadrupling of atmospheric CO2 (2×CO2 or 4×CO2 , respectively), and the ECS can be estimated from the intersect of this regression line with ΔN = 0 (Box 7.1, Figure 1b). To infer ECS from a given estimate of effective ECS necessitates that assumptions are made for how ERF varies with CO2 concentration (Section 7.3.2) and how the slope of ΔN against Δ T relates to the slope of the straight line from ERF to ECS (Section 7.5 and Box 7.1, Figure 1b). Care has to be taken when comparing results across different lines of evidence to translate their estimates of the effective ECS into the ECS definition used here (Section 7.5.5).The transient climate response, TCR (units: °C), is defined as the ΔT for the hypothetical scenario in which CO2 increases at 1% yr–1from a pre-industrial reference state to the time of a doubling of atmospheric CO2 concentration (year 70; Section 7.5). TCR is based on a CO2 concentration change, so any feedbacks that affect the atmospheric concentration of CO2 do not influence its value. It is a measure of transient warming accounting for the strength of climate feedbacks and ocean heat uptake. The transient climate response to cumulative emissions of carbon dioxide (TCRE)  is defined as the transient ΔTper 1000 Gt C of cumulative CO2 emissions increase since the pre-industrial period. TCRE combines information on the airborne fraction of cumulative CO2 emissions (the fraction of the total CO2 emitted that remains in the atmosphere at the time of doubling, which is determined by carbon cycle processes) with information on the TCR. TCR is assessed in this chapter, whereas TCRE is assessed in (Chapter 5 (Section 5.5).