Multi-level and polycentric governance is essential for implementing sufficiency, energy efficiency and renewable energies policies (IPCC 2018). Policies can be implemented at different levels of government and decision making, international, national, regional, and local. Policies for building have be adopted at national level (Enker and Morrison 2017), at state or regional level (Fournier et al. 2019), or at city level (Trencher and van der Heijden 2019). Zhao et al. (2019) find that national policies are instrumental in driving low carbon developments in buildings.International agreements (Kyoto, Montreal/Kigali, Paris, etc.) play an important role in establishing national energy-efficiency and renewable energy policies in several countries (Dhar et al. 2018; Bertoldi 2018). Under the Paris Agreement, some NDCs contain emission reduction targets for subsectors, for example, buildings, policies for subsectors and energy efficiency and/or renewable targets (see also Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 4). In the EU since 2007 climate and energy policies are part of a co-ordinated policy package. EU Member States have prepared energy efficiency plans every three years and long-term renovation strategies for buildings (Economidou et al. 2020). Under the new Energy and Climate Governance Regulation EU Member States have submitted at the end of 2020 integrated National Energy and Climate Plans, including energy efficiency and renewable plans. (Oberthur 2019; Schlacke and Knodt 2019). The integration of energy and climate change policies and their governance has been analysed (von Lüpke and Well 2020), highlighting the need of reinforcing the institutions, anticipatory governance, the inconsistency of energy policies and the emerging multi-level governance.Some policies are best implemented at international level. Efficiency requirements for traded goods and the associated test methods could be set at global level in order to enlarge the market, avoid technical barriers to trade; reduce the manufacturers design and compliance costs. International standards could be applied to developing countries when specific enabling conditions exist, particularly in regard to technology transfer, assistance for capacity buildings and financial support. This would also reduce the dumping of inefficient equipment in countries with no or lower efficiency requirements. An example is the dumping of new or used inefficient cooling equipment in developing countries, undermining national and local efforts to manage energy, environment, health, and climate goals. Specific regulations can be put in place to avoid such environmental dumping, beginning with the ‘prior informed consent’ as in the Rotterdam Convention and a later stage with the adoption of minimum efficiency requirements for appliances (Andersen et al. 2018; UNEP 2017). Dreyfus et al. (2020a) indicates that global policies to promote best technologies currently available have the potential to reduce climate emissions from air conditionings and refrigeration equipment by 210–460 GtCO2-eq by 2060, resulting from the phasing down of HFC and from improved energy efficiency. Another example is the commitment by governments in promoting improvements in energy efficiency of cooling equipment in parallel with the phasedown of HFC refrigerants enshrined in the Biarritz Pledge for Fast Action on Efficient Cooling signed in 2019. The policy development and implementation costs will be reduced as the technical analysis leading to the standard could be shared among governments. However, it is important that local small manufacturing companies in developing countries have the capacity to invest in updating production lines for meeting new stringent international efficiency requirements.Building energy consumption is dependent on local climate and building construction traditions, regional and local government share an important role in promoting energy efficiency in buildings and on-site RES, through local building energy codes, constructions permits and urban planning. In South Korea, there is a green building certification system operated by the government, based on this, Seoul has enacted Seoul’s building standard, which includes more stringent requirements. Where it is difficult to retrofit existing buildings, for example, historical buildings, cities may impose target at district level, where RES could be shared among buildings with energy positive buildings compensating for energy consuming buildings. Local climate and urban plans could also contribute to the integration of the building sector with the local transport, water, and energy sectors, requiring, for example, new constructions in areas served by public transport, close to offices or buildings to be ready for e-mobility. Buildings GHG emission reduction shall also be considered in greenfield and brownfield developments and urban expansion (Loo et al. 2017; Salviati and Ricciardo Lamonica 2020), including co-benefits (Zapata-Diomedi et al. 2019).Energy efficiency, sufficiency, and renewable policies and measures will have a large impact on different stakeholders (citizens, construction companies; equipment manufacturers; utilities, etc.), several studies highlighted the importance of stakeholder consultation and active participation in policy making and policy implementation (Vasileiadou and Tuinstra 2013; Ingold et al. 2020), including voluntary commitments and citizen assemblies. In particular, energy user’s role will be transformed from passive role to an active role, as outlined in the concept of energy citizenship (Campos and Marín-González 2020). The energy citizens need and voice should therefore be included in policy processes among traditional business players, such as incumbent centralised power generation companies and utilities (Van Veelen 2018). Architects and engineers play an important role in the decarbonisation of buildings. The professional bodies can mandate their members support energy efficiency and sufficiency. For example, the US AIA states in their code of ethics that architects must inform clients of climate risks and opportunities for sustainability. The capacity and quality of workforce and building construction, retrofit, and service firms are essential to execute the fast transition in building systems (Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 16).