Participation, cooperation and bottom-up engagement are critical to optimal adaptation (medium evidence, high agreement ). There is high confidence that many of the countries and social groups most threatened by climate change have contributed the least to global emissions and do not have not the resources to adapt. Effective participation of these actors in climate change adaptation planning in the water sector can contribute to more just adaptation actions (high confidence).There is medium evidence and high agreement  that optimal adaptation depends critically on inter-state cooperation (Banda, 2018), which in turn requires trust and norms of reciprocity among all those involved (Ostrom, 2014). Reciprocity is central to international cooperation on climate change, where actors are more inclined to cooperate when they perceive that the expected outcome will be fair in terms of costs and benefits of implementation (Keohane and Oppenheimer, 2016). Indeed, cooperation at the international level is less probable to occur if participants do not trust each other (Hamilton and Lubell, 2018). In climate-related water adaptation, transboundary cooperation is essential, as 60% of global freshwater resources contained in 276 river and lake basins are shared between countries (Timmerman et al., 2017). Yet, more than 50% of the world’s 310 international river basins lack any type of cooperative framework (McCracken and Meyer, 2018).SDG6 on water and sanitation includes a specific indicator (6.5.2) to assess cooperation over transboundary waters. While the methodology for measuring this indicator is debated, it is clear that its composition will influence international and national water policy and law (McCracken and Meyer, 2018) and possibly help build an environment of trust among riparian states. Moreover, although the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (A/RES/70/1) makes it clear that without the participation of local communities (e.g., SDG6, Target 6b) and women (e.g., SDG5, Target 5.5), the SDGs will not be met; the involvement of these actors in formal water governance processes and water management is still limited (Fauconnier et al., 2018). This is due partly to the absence, in many regions of the world, of adequate legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks for effective stakeholder participation, partly to the influence of local social and cultural contexts, which can discourage inclusive water governance (Andajani-Sutjahjo et al., 2015; Dang, 2017). Yet, inclusion and effective participation in bottom-up decision-making processes of those disproportionately affected by climate change—including women and Indigenous Peoples—is particularly important to ensure the legitimacy and inclusiveness of the decision-making process and the design of socially just adaptation actions (Shi et al., 2016). Moreover, incentives for bottom-up and participative decision-making in the water sector can facilitate effective stakeholder engagement (OECD, 2015), which helps build public confidence and trust in water governance.