Scale: LocalIssue: EbA in a city and surrounding areaDurban was an early pioneer of EbA in a city context, establishing a Municipal Climate Protection Programme (MCPP) in 2004 (Roberts et al., 2012). The city, situated in a global biodiversity hotspot (World Bank, 2016), has a rapidly growing population (approximately 3.5 million) and is highly fragmented (Roberts et al., 2013). High levels of development, particularly in peri-urban areas, have encroached into natural habitats (World Bank, 2016). Degradation of the natural resource base in this way has direct economic and financial costs, is threatening Durban’s long-term sustainability and is exacerbated by climate change (World Bank, 2016; eThekwini Municipality, 2020). The impacts of climate change are anticipated to increase unless appropriate mitigation and adaptation interventions are prioritised (eThekwini Municipality, 2020). High rates of poverty, unemployment and health problems have pushed Durban to explore a climate change adaptation work stream within its MCPP (Roberts et al., 2013; Roberts et al., 2020b).A single approach to adaptation is likely to be insufficient (Archer et al., 2014), and community-based adaptation should be integrated as part of a package of tools applied at the city level. Durban’s climate change adaptation work stream is composed of three separate components: municipal adaptation (adaptation activities linked to the key functions of local government), community-based adaptation (CbA, focused on improving the adaptive capacity of local communities), and a series of urban management interventions (addressing specific challenges such as the urban heat island, increased storm-water runoff, water conservation and SLR) (Roberts et al., 2013).Lessons learnt from Durban’s experience include the importance of meaningful partnerships, long-term financial commitments (Douwes et al., 2015) and significant political and administrative will (Roberts et al., 2012; Roberts et al., 2020b). Securing these requires strong leadership (Douwes et al., 2015), including from local champions (Archer et al., 2014), even when EbA is considered cost-effective (Roberts et al., 2012). Projects for the restoration of natural habitats are seen as an ideal tool, as they combine mitigation outcomes with an increased adaptation capacity, not only reducing the vulnerability of ecosystems and communities (Douwes et al., 2016) but creating economic opportunities. These include direct job creation (Diederichs and Roberts, 2016; Douwes and Buthelezi, 2016) with various spin-offs such as better education for schoolchildren (Douwes et al., 2015). Indirect benefits, including better water quality and reduced flooding, are generated as a result of improved ecosystem service delivery (Douwes and Buthelezi, 2016). In areas that are already developed, opportunities for green-roof infrastructure can yield reductions in roof storm-water runoff (by approx.. 60 ml/m 2/min during a rainfall event), slow the release of water over time and reduce temperatures on roof surfaces (Roberts et al., 2012).