The univariate detection method does not use spatial pattern information, but compares observed trends in gridded datasets with distributions of trends from ensembles of simulations during the historical period (Knutson et al., 2013; Knutson and Zeng, 2018). The trends arising from simulations constrained by natural forcing-only and all-forcing are compared with distributions of trends purely due to internal variability and derived from long simulations with constant pre-industrial external forcing. Consistency between observed and simulated historical trends is also assessed with statistical tests that can be applied independently over a large number of grid points. The fraction of area over a given region where the change is classified as detectable, attributable, or consistent/inconsistent, is then finally estimated. The method can be viewed as a simple consistency test for both amplitude and pattern of observed versus simulated trends. Its application to CMIP3 and CMIP5 models suggests that 80% of the Earth’s surface has a detectable anthropogenic warming signal (Knutson et al., 2013). Regarding regional land precipitation changes over the 1901–2010 and 1951–2010 periods, application of the univariate detection method based on CMIP5 models suggests attributable anthropogenic changes at several locations such as increases over regions of the north-central USA, southern Canada, Europe, and southern South America and decreases over parts of the Mediterranean region, northern tropical Africa and south-western Australia (Delworth and Zeng, 2014; Knutson and Zeng, 2018).Another regional attribution technique is based on the similarity of past changes between observations and one or several simulations of a large ensemble that share the same time evolution for a suggested driver of these changes. Huang et al. (2020b) used a perturbed physics ensemble to attribute the drying trend of the Indian monsoon over the latter half of the 20th century to decadal forcing from the Pacific Decadal Variability (PDV; Annex IV.2.6). The ensemble members predicted different trends in PDV behaviour across the 20th century and the negative precipitation trend was only replicated in those members with a strong negative-to-positive PDV transition across the 1970s, consistent with the observed PDV behaviour (see also the detailed case study in Section 10.6.3). In a similar manner, Cvijanovic et al. (2017) addressed the possible influence of Arctic sea ice loss on the North Pacific pressure ridge and, consequently, on south-western USA precipitation. They sampled the uncertainties in selected sea ice physics parameters to achieve a ‘low Arctic sea ice’ state in their perturbed simulations. They then compared the latter with control simulations representative of sea ice conditions at the end of the 20th century to assess changes purely due to sea ice loss.New methods aiming to remove underlying model biases before performing detection and attribution, for instance related to precipitation changes, are emerging based on image transformation techniques such as warping (Levy et al., 2014a). By correcting location and seasonal precipitation biases in CMIP5 models, Levy et al. (2014b) showed that the agreement between observed and fingerprint patterns can be improved, further enhancing the ability to attribute observed precipitation changes to external forcings. The improvement mainly relies on the assumption that precipitation changes are tied to the underlying climatology, which has been shown to be a reasonable assumption in regions of the world where intensification of the hydrological cycle is expected (Held and Soden, 2006).Importantly, evidence that the models employed in regional-scale attribution are fit for purpose is essential in order to estimate the degree of confidence in the attribution results (Section 10.3.3). For example, models need to be evaluated and assessed in their ability to simulate internal variability modes that are known to be important drivers of regional climate change (Sections 3.7 and 10.3.3.3 and Annexes IV.2 and IV.3). Models are likely to have different performance in different regions and therefore their evaluation needs to be performed in terms of key physical processes and mechanisms relevant to the climate of the region under consideration (Section 10.3.3).To conclude, there is very  high confidence (robust evidence and  high agreement) that the use of diverse and independent attribution methods, multiple model ensemble types and observed datasets strengthens the robustness of results of regional-scale attribution studies. Since AR5, multiple SMILEs have provided an adequate testbed for new attribution methodologies aimed at separating forced signals from internal variability in observational records as well as small-size single-model ensembles.