The federal government of each North American country has developed policies and actions that promote climate adaptation (Figure 14.12). Recognising the cultural, economic and social networks that span North America, the federal governments have also committed to engagement on adaptation and resilience across borders and through cooperation on domestic adaptation efforts (The White House, 2016). Each country also outlines their respective adaptation efforts through submissions under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, including their nationally determined contributions (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement. The federal governments also support adaptation efforts in other countries through international climate negotiations as well as related agreements, such as the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and efforts to support the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).Figure 14.12 | Conceptual diagram of the key elements for expanding the adaptation solution space and implementing climate resilient development (Chapter 18). Adapted from Shi and Moser (2021).Open figure Mexico’s 2020 update to its first NDC communicated extensive adaptation efforts (Government of Mexico, 2020). The measures outlined in this document highlight the importance of co-benefits for adaptation efforts as they relate to the SDGs and to support mitigation commitments. Ecosystem-based solutions and NbS (see Box 14.7) are the basis for much of the synergies between adaptation and mitigation efforts. These plans are supported by domestic legislation through the General Law on Climate Change, which includes the Climate Change Adaptation Process (CCAP). The CCAP provides a holistic systems approach for identifying instruments and institutional arrangements for adaptation implementation (Semarnat and INECC, 2015; INECC and Semarnat, 2018). This approach includes guidance for planning (e.g., the Climate Change Mid-Century Strategy, the Special Climate Change Program 2014–2018) and formalises its adaptation commitments to the Paris Agreement.In Canada, the Federal Adaptation Policy Framework (Government of Canada, 2011) guides domestic action to develop adaptation knowledge, build adaptive capacity, and mainstream adaptation into federal policy, in support of the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change (Government of Canada, 2016), which included specific adaptation measures and investments to build resilience. In August 2021, the government initiated a National Adaptation Strategy with development anticipated through 2022. Additionally, the government facilitates efforts and funds research, capacity building and information sharing across sectors and among government departments (Government of Canada, 2021a). The Canadian Centre for Climate Services provides access to climate data, tools and information 13. 9 In Canada’s revised NDC, near-term commitments to protecting land and oceans, and efforts related to sustainable and resilient energy systems, are highlighted as examples of co-benefits between climate-change adaptation and mitigation (Government of Canada, 2021b).The USA has experienced substantial revisions to its climate policy and its international engagement since AR5 with implications still unclear (Bomberg, 2021). Since AR5 and until early 2020, many congressionally mandated federal efforts (Beavers et al., 2016; Parris et al., 2016; Rockman et al., 2016; Caffrey and Hoffman, 2018) faced programmatic challenges, but most continued to provide research and capacity development to support adaptation implementation across the USA. Importantly, the US government sustained the national climate assessments (Lempert et al., 2018). Recently, the administration has re-engaged with the Paris Agreement and the USA has submitted an NDC (Government of the United States of America, 2021); however, adaptation was not directly addressed. Subsequent Executive orders mandate adaptation planning at the federal level (e.g., USEO 13754; USEO 14008). As of the time of this report, the US climate policy landscape is rapidly evolving, including major legislative initiatives (e.g., Green New Deal) (Boyle et al., 2021).