Urbanisation in the 21st century will be dominated by population and infrastructure growth in developing countries, and as such it is important to highlight three aspects that are unique and especially relevant for climate change mitigation. First, urbanisation will increase in speed and magnitude. Given their significant impact on emissions, mitigation action in Asian cities, especially the large and rapidly growing cities, will have significant implications on global ambitions (Section 8.3.4).Second, a number of cities in developing countries lack institutional, financial and technical capacities to enable local climate change action (Sharifi et al. 2017; Fuhr et al. 2018). While these capacities differ across contexts (Hickmann et al. 2017), several governance challenges are similar across cities (Gouldson et al. 2015). These factors also influence the ability of cities to innovate and effectively implement mitigation action (Nagendra et al. 2018) (Chapter 17).Third, there are sizable economic benefits in developing country cities that can provide an opportunity to enhance political momentum and institutions (Colenbrander et al. 2016). The co-benefits approach (Section 8.2), which frames climate objectives alongside other development benefits, is increasingly seen as an important concept justifying and driving climate change action in developing countries (Sethi and Puppim de Oliveira 2018).Large-scale system transformations are also deeply influenced by factors outside governance and institutions, such as private interests and power dynamics (Jaglin 2014; Tyfield 2014). In some cases, these private interests are tied up with international flows of capital. In India, adaptation plans involving networks of private actors and related mitigation actions have resulted in the dominance of private interests. This has led to trade-offs and adverse impacts on the poor (Chu 2016; Mehta et al. 2019).When planning and implementing low-carbon transitions, it is important to consider the socio-economic context. An inclusive approach emphasises the need to engage non-state actors, including businesses, research organisations, non-profit organisations and citizens (Lee and Painter 2015; Hale et al. 2020). For example, engaging people in defining locally relevant mitigation targets and actions has enabled successful transformations in China (Engels 2018), Africa (Göpfert et al. 2019) and Malaysia (Ho et al. 2015). An active research and government collaboration through multiple stakeholder interactions in a large economic corridor in Malaysia led to the development and implementation of a low-carbon blueprint for the region (Ho et al. 2013). Many cities in LDCs and developing countries lack adequate urban infrastructure and housing. An equitable transformation in these cities entails prioritising energy access and basic services, including safe drinking water and sanitation, to meet basic needs of their populations.