AR5 reported that religious and sacred values inform actions taken to adapt to climate change (Noble et al., 2014). Neither AR5 nor SR1.5 reviewed adaptation of indigenous, local and traditional uses of water. SROCC highlighted the context-specific adaptation strategies of vulnerable communities in coastal, polar and high-mountain areas, reporting that adaptive capacity and adaptation limits are not only physical, technical, institutional and financial, but also culturally informed (Hock et al., 2019b; Meredith et al., 2019; Oppenheimer et al., 2019).There is high confidence that some Indigenous Peoples, local communities and traditional peoples could adapt, and are adapting to climate-driven hydrological changes and their impacts on culturally significant sites, species, ecosystems and practices in polar, high-mountain and coastal areas, where sufficient funding, decision-making power and resourcing exist (e.g., Golden et al., 2015; Bunce et al., 2016; Anderson et al., 2018). However, there is also high confidence that there are significant structural barriers and limits to their adaptation, and that the outcomes of some adaptation strategies can be uneven and maladaptive (medium evidence, high agreement ) (Sections 4.7.4; 4.8.3). These barriers include the lack of recognition of Indigenous Peoples’ sovereignty and exclusion of Indigenous Peoples from decision-making institutions (Ford et al., 2017; Labbé et al., 2017; Eira et al., 2018; McLeod et al., 2018; MacDonald and Birchall, 2020) (14.4.4.2.2; 13.8.1.2). At the same time, the rate and scale of climate change can impede the ability of vulnerable communities to turn their adaptive capacity into effective adaptation responses (Ford et al., 2015; Herman-Mercer et al., 2019).There is high confidence that local people are adapting to the cultural impacts of climate-driven glacier retreat and decline in snow cover and ice in polar and high-mountain areas. However, there is also high confidence that such adaptation can be detrimental and disrupt local cultures. For example, in the Peruvian Andes, concerns about water availability for ritual purposes has led to restrictions on pilgrims’ removal of ice and limiting the size of ritual candles to preserve the glacier (Paerregaard, 2013; Allison, 2015). Relatedly, some local people have questioned the cosmological order and have reoriented their spiritual relationships accordingly (Paerregaard, 2013; Carey et al., 2017). In Siberia (Mustonen, 2015) and northern Finland (Turunen et al., 2016), community-led decisions among herders favour alternative routing, pasture areas and shifts in nomadic cycles in response to changing flood events and permafrost conditions (Box 13.2). However, loss of grazing land and pasture fragmentation pose adaptation limits, and some strategies such as supplementary feeding and new technologies may further affect cultural traditions of herding communities (Risvoll and Hovelsrud, 2016; Jaakkola et al., 2018).There is high confidence that relocation (managed retreat) is an adaptation response for communities in areas impacted by, or at risk of, inundation and other hydrological changes (15.3.4.7; 15.5.3). However, relocation can be culturally, socially, financially, politically and geographically constrained due to the importance of cultural relationships with traditional, customary or ancestral lands (high confidence) (Albert et al., 2018; Narayan et al., 2020; Yates et al., 2021). Among Pacific islands, for example, the prospect of migration raises concerns about the loss of cultural identity and IK and practices, which can impact emotional well-being (Yates et al., 2021).As cultural beliefs influence risk perception, there is medium confidence that some cultural understandings can foster a false sense of security among Indigenous Peoples, local communities and traditional peoples regarding climate-driven hydrological changes. For example, some members of the Rolwaling Sherpa community in Nepal believe that mountain deities protect them from GLOFs (Sherry and Curtis, 2017)(Section 4.2.2). Elsewhere, such as in the islands of Fiji and St. Vincent, cultural beliefs can diminish human agency because change is viewed as inevitable and beyond human intervention (Smith and Rhiney, 2016; Currenti et al., 2019). Yet such cultural beliefs are not necessarily maladaptive, as they potentially support other resilience factors, such as IKLK (Section 4.8.5; Ford et al., 2020), as well as cultural connections and social ties (Yates et al., 2021).In sum, although some Indigenous Peoples, local communities and traditional peoples can adapt, and are adapting to climate-driven hydrological changes, and their impacts on and risks to culturally significant practices and beliefs (medium confidence), these strategies are constrained by structural barriers and adaptation limits (high confidence).