This section provides a cross-sectoral perspective on land occupation and related impacts, risks and opportunities associated with land-based mitigation options, as well as mitigation options that are not designated land-based, yet occupy land. It builds on Chapter 7, which covers mitigation in agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU, including future availability of biomass resources for mitigation in other sectors. It complements Section 12.4, which covers mitigation inherent in the food system, as well as Chapters 6, 9, 10 and 11, which cover mitigation in the energy, transport, building and industry sectors, and Chapters 3 and 4 which cover land and biomass use, primarily in energy applications, in mitigation and development pathways in the near- to mid-term (Chapter 4) and in pathways compatible with long-term goals (Chapter 3).The deployment of climate change mitigation options often affects land and water conditions, and ecosystem capacity to support biodiversity and a range of ecosystem services (IPCC 2019a; IPBES 2019) (robust evidence,  high agreement ). It can increase or decrease terrestrial carbon stocks and sink strength, hence impacting the mitigation effect positively or negatively. As for any other land uses, impacts, risks and opportunities associated with mitigation options that occupy land depend on deployment strategy and on contextual factors that vary geographically and over time (Doelman et al. 2018; Hurlbert et al. 2019; Smith et al. 2019a; Wu et al. 2020) (robust evidence, high agreement ). The IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C (SR1.5) found that large areas may be utilised for A/R and energy crops in modelled pathways limiting warming to 1.5°C (Rogelj et al. 2018). The SRCCL investigated the implications of land-based mitigation measures for land degradation, food security and climate change adaptation. It focused on identification of synergies and trade-offs associated with individual land-based mitigation measures (Smith et al. 2019b). In this section we expand beyond the scope of the Special Report on Climate Change and Land (SRCCL) assessment to include also mitigation measures that occupy land while not being considered land-based measures, we discuss ways to minimise potential adverse effects, and we consider the potential for synergies through integrating mitigation measures with other land uses, by applying a systems perspective that seeks to meet multiple objectives from multi-functional landscapes. Mitigation measures with zero land occupation, e.g., offshore wind and kelp farming, are not considered.