Ensuring participatory governance and social inclusion. Interlinkages in the food-energy-water nexus highlight the importance of inclusive processes (Shaw et al. 2014; Nakano et al. 2017; Cook and Chu 2018; Romero-Lankao and Gnatz 2019). The cultivation of urban grassroots innovations and social innovation may accelerate progress (Wolfram and Frantzeskaki 2016), as may the development of carefully-designed climate and energy dialogues that enable learning among multiple stakeholders (Cashore et al. 2019).Considering synergies and trade-offs with broader sustainable development priorities. The explicit consideration of synergies and trade-offs will enable more integrated policy making (Dang et al. 2003; von Stechow et al. 2015). Policy frameworks to do so are just emerging, such as analysis of trade-offs between energy and water policies and agriculture (Huggel et al. 2015; Antwi-Agyei et al. 2018).Employing a diverse set of tools to reach targets. Building codes, land-use plans, public education initiatives, and nature-based solutions such as green ways may impact adaptation and mitigation simultaneously (Burch et al. 2014). Ecological restoration provides another suite of tools, for instance the Brazilian target of restoring and reforesting 0.12 million km 2 of forests by 2030, which can enhance biodiversity and ecosystem services while also sinking carbon (Bustamante et al. 2019). Mandatory retrofits to improve indoor air quality can also increase energy efficiency and resilience to climate change impacts (Friel et al. 2011; Houghton 2011).Monitoring and evaluating key indicators, beyond only greenhouse gas emissions, such as biodiversity, water quality, and affordability: An integrated approach requires robust process for collecting data on these indicators. Challenges are related to the limited evidence-base on synergies, co-benefits, and trade-offs across sectors and jurisdictions (Di Gregorio et al. 2016; Kongsager et al. 2016; Locatelli et al. 2017; Zen et al. 2019). Moreover, adaptation policies mostly lack measurable targets or expected outcomes increasing the challenge of designing an integrated framework (OECD 2017).Iterative and adaptive management. Adaptive management helps to address the underlying uncertainty (Kundzewicz et al. 2018) that characterises implementation of integrated approaches to adaptation and mitigation. Policy integration needs to be considered iteratively along the process of development, implementation, and evaluation of climate policies.Strategic partnerships that coordinate efforts.  Strategic partnerships among diverse actors, therefore, bring diverse technical skills and capacities to the endeavour (Burch et al. 2016; Islam and Khan 2017). However, realising strategic approaches for joint adaptation and mitigation require adequate financial, technical and human resources.Participatory and collaborative planning approaches can help overcome injustices and address power differentials. Participatory and collaborative planning approaches can provide multiple spaces of deliberation where marginalised voices can be heard (Blue and Medlock 2014; UN Habitat 2016; Castán Broto and Westman 2017; Waisman et al. 2019). These tools organise climate and sustainability action by addressing its democratic deficit and facilitating the recognition of multiple perspectives in environmental planning alongside material limits of development (Agyeman 2013).