The current pace, depth and scope of adaptation are insufficient to address future risks in mountain regions, particularly at higher warming levels (high confidence). While the incremental nature of most implemented adaptations will not be sufficient to reduce severe risk consequences, options exist which offer practical and timely prospects to address risks before limits to adaptation are reached or exceeded. Reducing climate risks will depend on addressing the root causes of vulnerability, which include poverty, marginalisation and inequitable gender dynamics (high confidence). {CCP5.4.1, Figure CCP5.7: CCP5.4.2, Cross-Chapter Box DEEP in Chapter 17; Cross-Chapter Box LOSS in Chapter 17; 17.3, 17.6}Adaptation decision-making processes that engage with and incorporate people’s concerns and values and address multiple risks are more robust than those with a narrow focus on single risks (medium confidence). Risk management strategies that better integrate the adaptation needs of all affected sectors, account for different risk perceptions and build on multiple and diverse knowledge systems, including Indigenous knowledge and local knowledge, are important enabling conditions to reduce risk severity (medium confidence). {CCP5.2.6, CCP5.4.2; 17.3; 17.4; Cross-Chapter Box PROGRESS in Chapter 17; Cross-Chapter Box DEEP in Chapter 17}Regional cooperation and transboundary governance in mountain regions, supported by multi-scale knowledge networks and monitoring programmes, enable long-term adaptation actions where risks transcend boundaries and jurisdictions (medium confidence). Collectively, they show potential to form an important component of the adaptation solution space in mountains. There are increasing calls for more ambitious climate action in mountains, providing impetus for stronger cooperation within and across mountain regions and downstream areas (medium confidence). {CCP5.4.2; CCP5.4.3 }With warming above 1.5°C, the need for adaptation to address key risks in mountains becomes increasingly urgent (high confidence). Pathways and system transitions that strengthen climate-resilient sustainable mountain development are starting to receive attention, but current levels of resourcing are substantially insufficient to support timely action. {CCP5.4.2; CCP5.4.3; CCP5.5; 18.1; 18.2}