Adaptation cost estimates can vary between various studies due to the differences in methodologies they adopt. Some studies have conducted cost assessments using a combination of stakeholder consultations and quantitative modelling of climate-change impacts and adaptation (Ahmed and Suphachalasai, 2014), while others depended solely on the quantitative modelling. Studies also differ in the coverage of sectors too: they either have focused on the multiple vulnerable sectors (Ahmed and Suphachalasai, 2014) or on a single sector (Hossain et al., 2019). Studies have differed in their estimates depending on their ability to take into consideration the transition costs of sudden adaptation (Hossain et al., 2019), the nature of social cost and/or damage functions employed (Arto et al., 2019), the discount rates applied (Markandya and González-Eguino, 2019) and consideration for the effects of GHG mitigation on adaptation needs (Duan et al., 2019a). In addition, the assumptions made on the pace of adaptation in estimating adaptation costs can make a difference in adaptation cost estimates. Adaptation at a slow or normal pace could require more adaptation finance, as large amounts of damage are not eliminated, than when adaptation is implemented at a faster rate (Markandya and González-Eguino, 2019). Although there have been improvements in adaptation cost estimates, there is a need to address the issue of endogeneity (Kousky, 2014; Samuel et al., 2019). The vast majority of studies that rely on databases, such as EM-DAT, tend to suffer from such endogeneity problems due to their inability to control the causality between GDP and damages (Kousky, 2014). Costs attributable to non-economic losses and damages are the least reported and least quantified in the adaptation costs literature due to lack of sufficient, robust and accessible methodologies (Chiba et al., 2017; Chiba et al., 2019; Serdeczny, 2019). This is a major limitation in assessing adaptation costs and financial needs, and it can lead to gross underestimation of adaptation costs. A detailed description of issues related to non-economic losses and damages, and its importance in strengthening adaptation, is provided in Box 10.6 and Table 10.5.