Food processing includes preparation and preservation of fresh commodities (fruit and vegetables, meat, seafood and dairy products), grain milling, production of baked goods, and manufacture of pre-prepared foods and meals. Food processors range from small local operations to large multinational food producers, producing food for local to global markets. The importance of food processing and preservation is particularly evident in developing countries which lack cold chains for the preservation and distribution of fresh perishable products such as fresh fish (Adeyeye and Oyewole 2016; Adeyeye 2017).Mitigation in food processing largely focuses on reducing food waste and fossil energy usage during the processing itself, as well as in the transport, packaging and storage of food products for distribution and sale (Silva and Sanjuán 2019). Reducing food waste provides emissions savings by reducing wastage of primary inputs required for food production. Another mitigation route, contributing to the circular bioeconomy (Section 12.6.1.2 and Cross-Working Group Box 3 in this chapter), is by valorisation of food processing by-products through recovery of nutrients and/or energy. No global analyses of the emissions savings potential from the processing step in the value chain could be found.Reduced food waste during food processing can be achieved by seeking alternative processing routes (Atuonwu et al. 2018), improved communication along the food value chain (Göbel et al. 2015), optimisation of food processing facilities, reducing contamination, and limiting damages and spillage (HLPE 2014). Optimisation of food packaging also plays an important role in reducing food waste, in that it can extend product shelf life; protect against damage during transport and handling; prevent spoilage; facilitate easy opening and emptying; and communicate storage and preparation information to consumers (Molina-Besch et al. 2019).Developments in smart packaging are increasingly contributing to reducing food waste along the food value chain. Strategies for reducing the environmental impact of packaging include using less, and more sustainable, materials and a shift to reusable packaging (Coelho et al. 2020). Active packaging increases shelf life through regulating the environment inside the packaging, including levels of oxygen, moisture and chemicals released as the food ages (Emanuel and Sandhu 2019). Intelligent packaging communicates information on the freshness of the food through indicator labels (Poyatos-Racionero et al. 2018), and data carriers can store information on conditions such as temperature along the entire food chain (Müller and Schmid 2019).LCA can be used to evaluate the benefits and trade-offs associated with different processing or packaging types (Silva and Sanjuán 2019). Some options, such as aluminium, steel and glass, require high energy investment in manufacture when produced from primary materials, with significant savings in energy through recycling being possible (Camaratta et al. 2020). However, these materials are inert in landfill. Other packaging options, such as paper and biodegradable packaging, may require a lower energy investment during manufacture, but may require larger land area and can release methane when consigned to anaerobic landfill where there is no methane recovery. Nevertheless, packaging accounts for only 1–12% (typically around 5%) of the GHG emissions in the lifecycle of a food system (Wohner et al. 2019; Crippa et al. 2021b), suggesting that its benefits can often outweigh the emissions associated with the packaging itself.The second component of mitigation in food processing relates to reduction in fossil energy use. Opportunities include energy efficiency in processes (also discussed in Section 11.3), the use of heat and electricity from low-carbon energy sources in processing (Chapter 6), through off-grid thermal processing (sun drying, food smoking) and improving logistics efficiencies. Energy-intensive processes with energy-saving potential include milling and refining (oil seeds, corn, sugar), drying, and food safety practices such as sterilisation and pasteurisation (Niles et al. 2018). Packaging also plays a role: reduced transport energy can be achieved through reducing the mass of goods transported and improving packing densities in transport vehicles (Lindh et al. 2016; Molina-Besch et al. 2019; Wohner et al. 2019). Choice of packaging also influences refrigeration energy requirements during transport and storage.