Chapter 4 is the lead chapter of this report for justice and climate mitigation issues, and includes an overview of institutions which have been set up to ensure a Just climate transition (Section 4.5). Chapter 13 has sought to integrate justice issues in Section 13.2 in reference to procedural justice and the impact of inequalities on sub-national institutions, Section 13.6 in regard to distribution, and Section 13.8 in relation to integrating mitigation and adaptation policies.This sub-section introduces the concept of transformative justice as part of measures intending to accelerate mitigation. Fair and effective climate policymaking requires institutional practices to: consider the distributional impacts of climate policy in the design and implementation of every policy (Agyeman 2013; Castán Broto and Westman 2017); align mitigation with other objectives such as inclusion and poverty reduction (Hughes and Hoffmann 2020; Rice et al. 2020; Hess and McKane 2021); represent a variety of voices, especially those of the most vulnerable (Bullard et al. 2008; Temper et al. 2018); and rely on open processes of participation (robust evidence,  high agreement ) (Anguelovski et al. 2016; Bouzarovski et al. 2018; Rice et al. 2020).Distributive approaches to climate justice address injustices related to access to resources and protection from impacts. There is an important difference between affirmative and transformative justice action (Fraser 1995; Agyeman et al. 2016; Castán Broto and Westman 2019): Affirmative action includes policies and strategies that seek to correct inequitable outcomes without disturbing the underlying political framework while transformative action seeks to correct inequitable outcomes by restructuring the underlying framework that produces inequalities.Transformative action that responds to distributive justice concerns include economy-wide actions via stimulus packages (such as the European Green Deal and the New Green Deal in the USA) (Section 13.9.5). Other examples are the increasing number of climate litigation suits that are transforming the way distributive dimensions of climate justice are understood (Section 13.4.2).