Only a very small number of studies have attempted to make systematic projections of future regional or global migration and displacement numbers under climate change. Key methodological challenges for making such projections include the availability of reliable data on migration within and between countries, definitional ambiguity in distinguishing climate-related migration from migration undertaken for other reasons, and accounting for the future influence of non-climatic factors. The most reliable example of such studies to date is a World Bank report by Rigaud et al. (2018) that generated projections of future internal population displacements in south Asia, sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America by 2050 using multiple climate and development scenarios, resulting in a very large range of possible outcomes (from 31 to 143 million people being displaced, depending on assumptions). An important outcome is the study’s emphasis on how the potential for future migration and displacement will be strongly mediated by socioeconomic development pathways in low- and middle-income countries. Hoffmann et al. (2020) used meta-regression-based analyses to project that future environmental influences on migration are likely  to be greatest in low- and middle-income countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East and most of continental Asia.Research reviewed in AR4 and AR5 observed that at higher rates of socioeconomic development, the in situ adaptive capacity of households and institutions rises, and climatic influences on migration correspondingly decline. Recent evidence adds further support for such conclusions (high confidence) (Kumar et al., 2018b; Mallick, 2019; Gray et al., 2020; Box 7.5). Population growth rates are currently highest in low-income countries (UN DESA Population Division, 2019), many of which have high rates of exposure to climatic hazards associated with population displacement, further emphasising the importance of socioeconomic development and adaptive capacity-building. Although country-specific scenarios for socioeconomic development and population are embedded in SSPs, research into future migration flows under climate change has not made great use of these. One of the few studies to do so found that safe and orderly international migration tends to increase wealth at regional and global scales in all SSP narratives, which in turn reduces income inequality between countries (Benveniste et al., 2021). International barriers to safe and orderly migration may potentially impede progress towards attainment of the objectives described in the SDGs and increase exposure to climatic hazards in low- and middle-income countries (McLeman, 2019; Benveniste et al., 2020).