Since AR5 WGI (Chapter 6), studies with ESMs have explored the land and ocean carbon sink response to scenarios with CO2 emissions gradually declining during the 21st century. As CDR and other mitigation activities are ramped up, CO2 emissions in these scenarios reach net zero and, as removals exceed emissions, become net negative. Studies exploring the carbon sink response to such scenarios (e.g., RCP2.6, SSP1-2.6) show that, when net CO2 emissions are positive but start to decline, uptake of CO2 by the land and ocean begins to weaken (compare land and ocean CO2 fluxes in panels a and b of Figure 5.33; Tokarska and Zickfeld, 2015; Jones et al., 2016b). During the first decades after CO2 emissions become net negative, both the ocean and land carbon sinks continue to take up CO2, albeit at a lower rate. For the land carbon sink, the sink-to-source transition occurs decades to a century after CO2 emissions become net negative (Figure 5.33c). The ocean remains a sink of CO2 for centuries after emissions become net negative (Figure 5.33c–e; Section 5.4.9; Figure 5.30). Whether the transition to source occurs at all, the timing of the transition and the magnitude of the CO2 source are determined by the magnitude of the removal and the rate and amount of net CO2 emissions prior to emissions becoming net negative (medium confidence) (Tokarska and Zickfeld, 2015; Jones et al., 2016b). For scenarios with large amounts of CO2 removal, such as SSP5-3.4-overshoot, the land source is larger than for SSP1-2.6 and the ocean also turns into a source (Section 5.4.10, Figure 5.30). While the qualitative response to scenarios with net-negative emissions is largely robust across models, the timing of the sink-to-source transition and the magnitude of the CO2 source vary between models, particularly for the land sink. Due to low agreement between models, there is low confidence in the timing of the sink-to-source transition and the magnitude of the CO2 source in scenarios with net-negative CO2 emissions.Figure 5.33 | Carbon sink response in a scenario with net carbon dioxide (CO2 ) removal from the atmosphere.  Shown are CO2 flux components from concentration-driven Earth system model (ESM) simulations during different emissions stages of SSP1-2.6 and its long-term extension:  (a) Large net positive CO2 emissions;  (b) small net positive CO2 emissions;  (c),  (d) net negative CO2 emissions;  (e) net zero CO2 emissions. Positive flux components act to raise the atmospheric CO2 concentration, whereas negative components act to lower the CO2 concentration. Net CO2 emissions, land and ocean CO2 fluxes represent the multi-model mean and standard deviation (error bar) of four ESMs (CanESM5, UKESM1, CESM2-WACCM, IPSL-CM6a-LR) and one Earth system model of intermediate complexity (UVic ESCM; Mengis et al., 2020). Net CO2 emissions are calculated from concentration-driven ESM simulations as the residual from the rate of increase in atmospheric CO2 and land and ocean CO2 fluxes. Fluxes are accumulated over each 50-year period and converted to concentration units (ppm). Further details on data sources and processing are available in the chapter data table (Table 5.SM.6). Open figure