General-purpose technologies (GPTs) include, but are not limited to, additive manufacturing, artificial intelligence, biotechnology, hydrogen, digitalisation, electrification, nanotechnology and robots (de Coninck et al. 2018). Many of the individual sectoral chapters have identified the roles that such technologies can have in supporting mitigation of GHG emissions. Section 16.2.2.3 presents an overview of the individual technologies and specific applications thereof.In this chapter, which focuses on cross-sectoral implications of mitigation, it is highlighted that certain of these GPTs will find application across the sectors, and there will be synergies and trade-offs when utilising these technologies in more than sector. One example here is the use of hydrogen as an energy carrier, which, when coupled with low-carbon energy, has potential for driving mitigation in energy, industry, transport, and buildings. The increased uptake of hydrogen across the economy requires establishment of hydrogen production, transport and storage infrastructure which could simultaneously support multiple sectors, although there is the potential to utilise existing infrastructure in some parts of the world (Alanne and Cao 2017).  Box 12.5 provides further details on hydrogen in the context of cross-sectoral mitigation specifically, while further details on the role of hydrogen in individual sectors are provided in Chapters 6, 8. 9, 10 and 11. In contrast, the benefits of digitalisation, which could potentially give rise to substantial energy savings across multiple sectors, need to be traded off against demand for electricity to operate consumer devices, data centres, and data networks. Measures are required to increase energy efficiency of these technologies (IEA 2017). Section 5.3.4.1 of this report provides further information on energy and emissions benefits and costs of digitalisation.With respect to co-impacts of GPTs, the other focus of this chapter, it is highlighted that assessment of the environmental, social and economic implications of such technologies is challenging and context specific, with multiple potential cross-sectoral linkages (de Coninck et al. 2018). Each GPT would need to be explored in context of what it is being used for, and potentially in the geographical context, in order to understand the co-impacts of its use.