As discussed in Chapter 16, adaptation is a key mechanism for managing climate risks, and therefore for pursuing CRD. The lower estimates in Table 18.2 are associated with higher levels of adaptation and more conducive development conditions. Furthermore, additional adaptation demand is associated with greater levels of climate change. Adaptation is a broad term referring to many different levels of response and options for natural and human systems, from individuals, specific locations and specific technologies, to nations, markets, global dynamics and strategies at the system level. Adaptation also includes endogenous reflexive and exogenous policy responses. Perspectives on limits to adaptation, synergies, trade-offs and feasibility therefore depend on where the boundaries are drawn and the objective. Overall, there are a broad range of adaptation options relevant to reducing risks posed by climate change to development. However, current understanding of how such options are implemented in practice, their effectiveness across a range of possible climate futures and their potential limits, is modest.The IPCC’s SR1.5 report evaluated individual adaptation options in terms of economic, technological, institutional, socio-cultural, environmental/ecological and geophysical feasibility (de Coninck et al., 2018). This analysis has been updated for AR6 (Cross-Chapter Box FEASIB). These assessments identify types of barriers that could affect an option’s feasibility. Among other things, this work finds that every adaptation option evaluated had at least one feasibility dimension that represented a barrier or obstacle. The barriers also imply that there are trade-offs in these feasibility dimensions to consider. Overall, insights from this work are high-level and difficult to apply to a specific adaptation context. The feasibility and ranking of adaptation opportunities, as well as the list of opportunities themselves, for a given location will vary from location to location, with different criteria and weighting of criteria that reflect the priorities of society and decision-makers as well as differences in markets, technology options and policies for managing risks and trade-offs. Integrated evaluation of criteria and options is needed, that accounts for the relevant geographic context and interactions between options and systems (Section 18.5).Sustainable development is regarded as generally consistent with climate change adaptation, helping build adaptive capacity by addressing poverty and inequalities and improving inclusion and institutions (Roy et al., 2018). Some sustainable development strategies could facilitate adaptation effectiveness by addressing wider socioeconomic barriers, addressing social inequalities and promoting livelihood security (Roy et al., 2018). With a common goal of reducing risks, sustainable development and adaptation are relatively synergistic. For example, “low-regrets” adaptation strategies have been identified, such as improvements in health systems that reduce climate health impacts in cities (Barata, 2018). However, trade-offs also have been found and are important to consider and potentially address. Synergies have been found between adaptation and poverty reduction, hunger reduction, clean water access and health; while, trade-offs have also been found, particularly when adaptation strategies prioritise one development objective (e.g., food security or heat-stress risk reduction) or promote high-cost solutions with budget allocation and equity implications (Roy et al., 2018) (Sections 18.2.5.3, 18.5, Box 18.4). There are also opportunities for addressing the trade-offs, in particular distributional effects—by recognising that there are trade-offs and considering alternatives and complementary strategies to address those trade-offs (Section 18.2.5.3).