New sources of flexibility and advanced control systems provide a significant opportunity to reduce low-carbon energy system costs by enhancing operating efficiency and reducing energy infrastructure and low-carbon generation investments, while continuing to meet security requirements ( high confidence). In the USA, for example, one study found that flexibility in buildings alone could reduce US CO2 emissions by 80 Mt yr –1 and save USD18 billion yr –1 in electricity system costs by 2030 (Satchwell et al. 2021). Key means for creating savings are associated with the following:•Efficient energy system operation. Flexibility technologies such as storage, demand-side response, interconnection, and cross-system control will enable more efficient, real-time demand and supply balancing. This balancing has historically been provided by conventional fossil-fuel generation (Nuytten et al. 2013).•Savings in investment in low-carbon/renewable generation capacity.  System flexibility sources can absorb or export surplus electricity, thus reducing or avoiding energy curtailment and reducing the need for firm low-carbon capacity such as nuclear and fossil-fuel plants with CCS (Newbery et al. 2013; Solomon et al. 2019). For example, one study found that flexibility technologies and advanced control systems could reduce the need for nuclear power by 14 GW and offshore wind by 20 GW in the UK’s low-carbon transition (Strbac et al. 2015b).•Reduced need for backup capacity.  System flexibility can reduce energy demand peaks, reducing the required generation capacity to maintain the security of supply, producing significant savings in generation investments (Strbac et al. 2020).•Deferral or avoidance of electricity network reinforcement/addition. Flexibility technologies supported by advanced control systems can provide significant savings in investment in electricity network reinforcement that might emerge from increased demand, for example, driven by electrification of transport and heat sectors. Historical network planning and operation standards are being revised considering alternative flexibility technologies, which would further support cost-effective integration of decarbonised transport and heat sectors (Strbac et al. 2020).