Enhancing technology innovation systems can provide opportunities to lower emissions growth and create social and environmental co- benefits. Policy packages tailored to national contexts and technological characteristics have been effective in supporting low-emission innovation and technology diffusion.  Support for successful low-carbon technological innovation includes public policies such as training and R&D, complemented by regulatory and market-based instruments that create incentives and market opportunities such as appliance performance standards and building codes.. (high confidence). {WGIII SPM B.4, WGIII SPM B.4.4, WGIII SPM E.4.3, WGIII SPM E4.4}International cooperation on innovation systems and technology development and transfer, accompanied by capacity building, knowledge sharing, and technical and financial support can accelerate the global diffusion of mitigation technologies, practices and policies and align these with other development objectives (high confidence)  . Choice architecture can help end-users adopt technology and low-GHG-intensive options (high confidence). Adoption of low-emission technologies lags in most developing countries, particularly least developed ones, due in part to weaker enabling conditions, including limited finance, technology development and transfer, and capacity building (medium confidence). {WGIII SPM B.4.2, WGIII SPM E.6.2, WGIII SPM C.10.4, WGIII 16.5}International cooperation on innovation works best when tailored to and beneficial for local value chains, when partners collaborate on an equal footing, and when capacity building is an integral part of the effort. (medium confidence). {WGIII SPM E.4.4, WGIII SPM E.6.2}Technological innovation can have trade-offs that include externalities such as new and greater environmental impacts and social inequalities; rebound effects leading to lower net emission reductions or even emission increases; and overdependence on foreign knowledge and providers (high confidence). Appropriately designed policies and governance have helped address distributional impacts and rebound effects (high confidence). For example, digital technologies can promote large increases in energy efficiency through coordination and an economic shift to services (high confidence). However, societal digitalization can induce greater consumption of goods and energy and increased electronic waste as well as negatively impacting labour markets and worsening inequalities between and within countries (medium confidence). Digitalisation requires appropriate governance and policies in order to enhance mitigation potential (high confidence). Effective policy packages can help to realise synergies, avoid trade-offs and/or reduce rebound effects: these might include a mix of efficiency targets, performance standards, information provision, carbon pricing, finance and technical assistance (high confidence). {WGIII SPM B.4.2, WGIII SPM B.4.3, WGIII SPM E.4.4, WGIII TS 6.5, WGIII Cross-Chapter Box 11 on Digitalization in Chapter 16}Technology transfer to expand use of digital technologies for land use monitoring, sustainable land management, and improved agricultural productivity supports reduced emissions from deforestation and land use change while also improving GHG accounting and standardisation (medium confidence). {SRCCL SPM C.2.1, SRCCL SPM D.1.2, SRCCL SPM D.1.4, SRCCL 7.4.4, SRCCL 7.4.6}