The‘hydrogen economy’ is a long-touted vision for the energy and transport sectors, and one that has gone through hype-cycles since the energy crises in the 1970s  (Meltonet al. 2016). The widely varying visions of hydrogen futures have mainly been associated with fuel cells in vehicles, small-scale decentralised cogeneration of heat and electricity, and to a certain extent energy storage for electricity  (Eameset al. 2006; Syniak and Petrov 2008). However, nearly all hydrogen currently produced is used in industry, mainly for hydrotreating in oil refineries, to produce ammonia, and in other chemical processes, and it is mostly made using fossil fuels.In the context of net zero emissions, new visions are emerging in which hydrogen has a central role to play in decarbonising industry. Near-term industrial applications for hydrogen include feeding it into ammonia production for fertilisers, while a more novel application would be as a replacement for coal as the reductant in steel-making, being piloted by the HYBRIT project in Sweden 2020–2021, and many companies have initiated hydrogen steel-making projects. As shown in Sections11.3.5 and 11.3.6, there are many other potential applications of hydrogen, some of which are still relatively unexplored. Hydrogen can also be used to produce various lower-GHG hydrocarbons and alcohols for fuels and chemical feedstocks using carbon from biogenic sources or direct air capture of CO2 (Ericsson 2017; Huang et al. 2020).The geographical distribution of the potential for hydrogen from electrolysis powered by renewables like solar and wind, nuclear electrothermally produced hydrogen, and hydrogen from fossil gas with CCS may reshape where heavy industry is located, how value chains are organised, and what gets transported in international shipping (Bataille 2020a; Gielen et al. 2020; Bataille et al. 2021a; Saygin and Gielen 2021). Regions with bountiful renewables resources, nuclear, or methane co-located with CCS geology may become exporters of hydrogen or hydrogen carriers such as methanol and ammonia, or home to the production of iron and steel, organic platform chemicals, and other energy-intensive basic materials. This in turn may generate new trade patterns and needs for bulk transport.