Tables 11.1 and 11.2 provide a synthesis for observed and attributed changes in extremes, and projected changes in extremes, respectively, at different levels of global warming. This synthesis assessment focuses on the assessed range of observed and projected changes. In this chapter, the assessed likely range in a projection typically corresponds to the 90% range of the multi-model ensemble spread to take into account other sources of uncertainty, unless stated otherwise. Some low-likelihood, high-impact scenarios that can be of high relevance are addressed in Box 11.2.Building on the assessments from Tables 11.1 and 11.2, Figure 11.5 provides a synthesis on the level of confidence in the attribution and projection of changes in extremes. In the case where the signal in the observations is still relatively weak but the physical processes underlying the changes in extremes in response to human forcing are well understood, confidence in the projections would be higher than in the attribution because of strengthening in the signal with warming. But, when the observed signal is already strong and when observational evidence is consistent with model simulated responses, confidence in the projection may be lower than that in attribution if certain physical processes could be expected to behave differently in a much warmer world and under much higher greenhouse gas forcing, and in particular if such a behaviour is poorly understood.Figure 11.5 |  confidence and likelihood of past changes and projected future changes at 2°C of global warming on the global scale. The information in this figure is based on Tables 11.1 and 11.2. Open figureFurther synthesis for regional assessments are provided in Figure 11.4 (event attribution), Figure 11.6 (projected change in hot temperature extremes) and Figure 11.7 (projected changes in precipitation extremes). A synthesis on regional assessments for observed, attributed and projected changes in extremes is provided in Section 11.9 for all AR6 reference regions (see Section 1.4.5 and Figures 1.18 and Atlas.2 for definitions of AR6 regions).Figure 11.6 | Projected changes in the frequency of extreme temperature events under 1°C, 1.5°C, 2°C, 3°C, and 4°C global warming levels relative to the 1850–1900 baseline. Extreme temperatures are defined as the maximum daily temperatures that were exceeded on average once during a 10-year period (10-year event, blue) and once during a 50-year period (50-year event, orange) during the 1850–1900 base period. Results are shown for the global land area and the AR6 regions. For each box plot, the horizontal line and the box represent the median and central 66% uncertainty range, respectively, of the frequency changes across the multi-model ensemble, and the ‘whiskers’ extend to the 90% uncertainty range. The dotted line indicates no change in frequency. The results are based on the multi-model ensemble from simulations of global climate models contributing to the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6) under different Shared Socio-economic Pathway forcing scenarios. Adapted from Li et al. (2021). Further details on data sources and processing are available in the chapter data table (Table 11.SM.9). Open figureFigure 11.7 | Projected changes in the frequency of extreme precipitation events under 1°C, 1.5°C, 2°C, 3°C, and 4°C global warming levels relative to the 1850–1900 baseline. Extreme precipitation is defined as the annual maximum daily precipitation (Rx1day) that was exceeded on average once during a 10-year period (10-year event, blue) and once during a 50-year period (50-year event, orange) during the 1850–1900 base period. Results are shown for the global land area and the AR6 regions. For each box plot, the horizontal line and the box represent the median and central 66% uncertainty range, respectively, of the frequency changes across the multi-model ensemble, and the ‘whiskers’ extend to the 90% uncertainty range. The dotted line indicates no change in frequency. The results are based on the multi-model ensemble from simulations of global climate models contributing to the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6) under different Shared Socio-economic Pathway forcing scenarios. Adapted from Li et al. (2021). Further details on data sources and processing are available in the chapter data table (Table 11.SM.9). Open figureTable 11.1 | Synthesis table on observed changes in extremes and contribution by human influence. Note that observed changes in marine extremes are assessed in Cross-Chapter Box 9.1. Phenomenon and Direction of TrendObserved/Detected Trends Since 1950 (for +0.5°C global warming or higher)Human Contribution to the Observed Trends Since 1950 (for +0.5°C global warming or higher)Warmer and/or more frequent hot days and nights over most land areasWarmer and/or fewer cold days and nights over most land areasWarm spells/heatwaves: increases in frequency or intensity over most land areasCold spells/cold waves: decreases in frequency or intensity over most land areasVirtually certain on global scale {11.3}Continental-scale evidence: Asia, Australasia, Europe, North America: Very likely Central and South America: High confidenceAfrica: Medium confidence{11.3, 11.9}Extremely likely  main contributor on global scale {11.3}Continental-scale evidence: North America, Europe, Australasia, Asia: Very likely Central and South America: High confidenceAfrica: Medium confidence{11.3, 11.9}Heavy precipitation events: increase in the frequency, intensity, and/or amount of heavy precipitationLikely on global scale, over majority of land regions with good observational coverage {11.3}Continental-scale evidence: Asia, Europe, North America: LikelyAfrica, Australasia, Central and South America: Low confidence{11.3, 11.9}Likely main contributor to the observed intensification of heavy precipitation in land regions on global scale.{11.3}Continental-scale evidence: Asia, Europe, North America: LikelyAfrica, Australasia, Central and South America: Low confidence{11.3, 11.9}Increases in agricultural and ecological drought eventsMedium confidence some regions {11.6, 11.9}Increasing trends in agricultural and ecological droughts have been observed in AR6 regions on all continents (medium confidence) {11.6, 11.9}Medium confidence some regions{11.6, 11.9}Increase in precipitation associated with tropical cyclones (TCs)Medium confidence{11.7}High confidence{11.7}Increase in likelihood that a TC will be at major TC intensity (Cat. 3–5)Likely{11.7}Medium confidence{11.7}Changes in frequency of rapidly intensifying tropical cyclonesLikely{11.7}Medium confidence{11.7}Poleward migration of tropical cyclones in the western PacificMedium confidence{11.7}Medium confidence{11.7}Decrease in TC forward motion over the USAIt is likely  that TC translation speed has slowed over the USA since 1900.{11.7}It is more likely than not  that the slowdown of TC translation speed over the USA has contributions from anthropogenic forcing.{11.7}Severe convective storms (tornadoes, hail, rainfall, wind, lightning)Low confidence in past trends in hail and winds and tornado activity due to short length of high-quality data records. {11.7}Low confidence{11.7}Increase in compound eventsLikely increase in the probability of compound events.High confidence that concurrent heatwaves and droughts are becoming more frequent under enhanced greenhouse gas forcing at global scale.Medium confidence that fire weather, i.e. compound hot, dry and windy events, have become more frequent in some regions. Medium confidence that compound flooding risk has increased in some locations.{11.8}Likely that human-induced climate change has increased the probability of compound events.High confidence that human influence has increased the frequency of concurrent heatwaves and droughts. Medium confidence that human influence has increased fire weather occurrence in some regions. Low confidence that human influence has contributed to changes in compound events leading to flooding.{11.8}Table 11.2 | Synthesis table on projected changes in extremes. Note that projected changes in marine extremes are assessed in Chapter 9 and Cross-Chapter Box 9.1 (marine heatwaves). Assessments are provided compared to pre-industrial conditions. Phenomenon and Direction of TrendProjected Changes at +1.5ºC Global WarmingProjected Changes at +2°C Global WarmingProjected Changes at +4°C Global WarmingWarmer and/or more frequent hot days and nights over most land areasWarmer and/or fewer cold days and nights over most land areasWarm spells/heatwaves; increases in frequency or intensity over most land areasCold spells/cold waves: decreases in frequency or intensity over most land areasVirtually certain on global scaleExtremely likely  on all continents Highest increase of temperature of hottest days is projected in some mid-latitude and semi-arid regions, and the South American Monsoon region, at about 1.5 times to twice the rate of global warming (high confidence){11.3, Figure 11.3}Highest increase of temperature of coldest days is projected in Arctic regions, at about three times the rate of global warming (high confidence){11.3}Continental-scale projections: Extremely likely : Africa, Asia, Australasia, Central and South America, Europe, North America{11.3, 11.9}Virtually certain on global scaleVirtually certain on all continentsHighest increase of temperature of hottest days is projected in some mid-latitude and semi-arid regions, and the South American Monsoon region, at about 1.5 times to twice the rate of global warming (high confidence){11.3, Figure 11.3}Highest increase of temperature of coldest days is projected in Arctic regions, at about three times the rate of global warming (high confidence){11.3}Continental-scale projections: Virtually certain: Africa, Asia, Australasia, Central and South America, Europe, North America{11.3, 11.9}Virtually certain on global scaleVirtually certain on all continentsHighest increase of temperature of hottest days is projected in some mid-latitude and semi-arid regions, and the South American Monsoon region, at about 1.5 times to twice the rate of global warming (high confidence){11.3, Figure 11.3}Highest increase of temperature of coldest days is projected in Arctic regions, at about three times the rate of global warming (high confidence){11.3}Continental-scale projections: Virtually certain: Africa, Asia, Australasia, Central and South America, Europe, North America{11.3, 11.9}Heavy precipitation events: increase in the frequency, intensity, and/or amount of heavy precipitationHigh confidence that increases take place in most land regions{11.4}Very likely : Asia, North AmericaLikely: Africa, EuropeHigh confidence: Central and South AmericaMedium confidence: Australasia{11.4, 11.9}Likely that increases take place in most land regions{11.4}Extremely likely : Asia, North AmericaVery likely : Africa, EuropeLikely: Australasia, Central and South America{11.4, 11.9}Very likely  that increases take place in most land regions{11.4}Virtually certain: Africa, Asia, North AmericaExtremely likely : Central and South America, EuropeVery likely Australasia{11.4, 11.9}Agricultural and ecological droughts: increases in intensity and/or duration of drought eventsMore regions affected by increases in agricultural and ecological droughts compared to observed changes (high confidence). {11.6, 11.9}Decreased precipitation is going to increase the severity of drought in some regions; atmospheric evaporative demand will continue to increase compared to pre-industrial conditions and lead to further increases in agricultural and ecological droughts due to increased evapotranspiration in some regions. (high confidence){11.6, 11.9}More regions affected by increases in agricultural and ecological droughts than at 1.5°C of global warming (high confidence). {11.6, 11.9}Decreased precipitation is going to increase the severity of drought in some regions; atmospheric evaporative demand will continue to increase compared to pre-industrial conditions and lead to further increases in agricultural and ecological droughts due to increased evapotranspiration in some regions. (high confidence){11.6, 11.9}More regions affected by increases in agricultural and ecological droughts than at 2°C of global warming (very likely) . {11.6, 11.9}Decreased precipitation is going to increase the severity of drought in several regions; atmospheric evaporative demand will continue to increase compared to pre-industrial conditions and lead to further increases in agricultural and ecological droughts due to increased evapotranspiration in several regions. (high confidence){11.6, 11.9}Increase in precipitation associated with tropical cyclones (TCs)High confidence in a projected increase of TC rain rates at the global scale with amedian projected increase due to human emissions of about 11%. {11.7}Medium confidence that rain rates will increase in every basin. {11.7}High confidence in a projected increase of TC rain rates at the global scale with a median projected increase due to human emissions of about 14%. {11.7}Medium confidence that rain rates will increase in every basin. {11.7}High confidence in a projected increase of TC rain rates at the global scale with a median projected increase due to human emissions of about 28%. {11.7}Medium confidence that rain rates will increase in every basin. {11.7}Increase in mean TC lifetime-maximum wind speed (intensity)Medium confidence{11.7}High confidence{11.7}High confidence{11.7}Increase in likelihood that a TC will reach major TC intensity (Category 4–5)High confidence for an increase in the proportion of TCs that reach the strongest (Category 4–5) levels. The median projected increase in this proportion is about 10%. {11.7}High confidence for an increase in the proportion of TCs that reach the strongest (Category 4–5) levels. The median projected increase in this proportion is about 13%.{11.7}High confidence for an increase in the proportion of TCs that reach the strongest (Category 4–5) levels. The median projected increase in this proportion is about 20%.{11.7}Severe convective stormsHigh confidence that the average and maximum rain rates associated with severe convective storms increase in some regions, including the USA. High confidence that convective available potential energy (CAPE) increases in response to global warming in the tropics and subtropics, suggesting more favourable environments for severe convective storms. Medium confidence that the frequency of spring severe convective storms is projected to increase in the USA, leading to a lengthening of the severe convective storm season. {11.7}Increase in compound events (frequency, intensity)Likely that probability of compound events will continue to increase with global warming.High confidence that concurrent heatwaves and droughts will continue to increase under higher levels of global warming, with higher frequency/intensity with every additional 0.5°C of global warming.High confidence that fire weather, (i.e. compound hot, dry and windy events), will become more frequent in some regions at higher levels of global warming. High confidence that compound flooding at the coastal zone will increase under higher levels of global warming. {11.8}