Societal choices and development trajectories emerge from decisions made in different arenas which intersect and interact across levels and scales, in diverse institutional settings—some formal with their associated instruments and interventions, while others are informal. Since AR5, both formal and informal setting are increasingly arenas of debate and contestation regarding development choices and pathways (very high confidence) (Section 18.4.4, Chapters 1, 6, 8, 10 and 17). Community arenas exist from the local to the global scale and constitute the many interactions between governance actors, often transcending any one scale to reflect the emergent outcomes of interactions in political, economic, socio-cultural, knowledge-technology and ecological arenas of engagement. Actions within and between these five arenas hence come together in the community arena of engagement. While community engagement is often described at the level of villages and cities (Ziervogel et al., 2021) (Chapter 8), communities in terms of people interacting with each other sharing worldviews, values and behaviours, also exist at the regional and global levels. For example, civil society engagement in climate action reached a peak in 2019, notably through the global youth movement which led to large global mobilisation and street demonstrations on all continents and in many large cities (Bandura and Cherry, 2020; Han and Ahn, 2020; Martiskainen et al., 2020). Calling for enhanced climate action by governments and other societal actors, the youth movement was supported by many other societal groups and networks, including arenas of community interaction.While the SR1.5 (de Coninck et al., 2018) for the first time comprehensively assessed behavioural dimensions of climate change adaptation, most literature still has a greater focus on what triggers mitigation behaviour (Lorenzoni and Whitmarsh, 2014; Clayton et al., 2015). Meanwhile, with CRD still a relatively young concept, there is little literature focused on what motivates action in pursuit of CRD rather than its sub-components of climate action and sustainable development. Nevertheless, a common motivation that is emerging in the literature is clinically significant levels of climate distress among individuals (Bodnar, 2008), which is experienced as a continuing distress over a changed landscape which no longer offers solace, also known as solastalgia (high agreement , medium evidence) (Albrecht et al., 2007). This is accompanied by a shift from blaming natural forces for disasters to attributing it to human negligence, which is known to lead to more acute perceptions of risk as well as more prolonged post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) than trauma arising from non-human causes. Improving social connections, acknowledging anxiety, reconnecting to nature and finding creative ways to re-engage are identified as ways of managing this growing anxiety (Lertzman, 2010; Clayton et al., 2017). Climate action in communities at various scales could fulfil many of these needs.