As the consumption of animal protein and products rises along with global standards of living, CRD will require transformations in livestock-centred livelihoods. Livestock are a key contributor to global food security, especially in marginal lands where animal products are a unique source of energy, protein and micronutrients (FAO, 2017; IPCC, 2019a). However, they also contribute disproportionately to total annual anthropogenic GHG emissions globally and influence climate through land use change, processing and transport through emitting CO2, animal production by increasing methane emissions, and feed and manure production by emitting CO2, nitrous oxide, and methane, (Rojas-Downing et al., 2017). Mitigation of livestock emissions can be achieved by implementation of various technologies and practices such as improving diets to reduce enteric fermentation, improving manure management and improving animal nutrition and genetics (Rojas-Downing et al., 2017); altering land use for grazing and feed production, altering feeding practices, improving manure treatment and reducing herd size (Zhang et al., 2017). Adaptation strategies in the livestock sector include changes in animal feeding, genetic manipulation, alterations in species and/or breeds (Zhang et al., 2017), shifting to mixed crop–livestock systems (Rojas-Downing et al., 2017), production and management system modifications, breeding strategies, institutional and policy changes, science and technology advances, and changing farmers’ perceptions and adaptive capacity (USDA, 2013).Policies supporting sustainable rangeland management and the livelihood strategies of rangeland users have an outsized influence on both development and climate action (Gharibvand et al., 2015). Climate change adaptation, mitigation practices and livestock production can be supported by policies that encourage diversification of livestock animals (within species), support sustainable foraging and feed varieties (Rivera-Ferre et al., 2016) and strengthen institutions such as agricultural support programmes, markets and intra- and inter-regional trade (Zhang et al., 2017). For example, sustainable pastoralism can contribute to mitigation both by increasing carbon sequestration through improved soil management and by reducing methane emissions through changing the mix and distribution of the herd. Likewise sustainable pastoralism can also contribute to adaptation by changing grazing management, introducing alternative livestock breeds, improving pest management and modifying production structures (Joyce et al., 2013). Another example of rangeland adaptation is diversifying the use of rangelands, such as supplementing with payments for ecosystem services, carbon sequestration, tourism or supplementary assistance for all land-based activities (Gharibvand et al., 2015). However, challenges for climate-smart livestock production systems remain due to a lack of information, limited access to technology and insufficient capital (FAO, 2017). Smallholders in cropping and livestock systems in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, for example, face obstacles obtaining climate change mitigation and adaptation synergies due to poor access to markets and relevant knowledge, land tenure insecurity and the common property status of most grazing resources (Descheemaeker et al., 2016). Consequently, the appropriateness of these strategies and measures needs to be further evaluated, particularly in terms of their usefulness for the poor and most vulnerable.Overall, different farming and pastoral systems can achieve reductions in the emissions intensity of livestock products. Depending on the farming and pastoral systems and level of development, reductions in the emissions intensity of livestock products may lead to absolute reductions in GHG emissions (IPCC, 2019a) (medium confidence). Significant synergies exist between adaptation and mitigation, for example, through SLM approaches (high confidence).