SummaryA 4-year project in Nusa Tenggara Barat Province, Indonesia, aimed to stimulate an adaptation pathways process. The goal was to support CRD in a context with low stakeholder capacity, high poverty, and rapid environmental and social change. On these archipelagic islands, livelihoods are predominantly rural, far from political and urban centres. The project focused on integrated top-down and bottom-up development planning that could enable CRD at the local level, linked to provincial and national plans.Lessons learntSubstantial gradients in both climate and livelihoods in the island geographies necessitate fine-scale planning and make it difficult to scale up.Infrastructural investments, including roads, ports and irrigation, are crucial to CRD. If not well designed, such investments are prone to maladaptation, such as exposure to sea level rise.Although some development interventions are delivering climate resilience, such outcomes are often haphazard, rather than strategically conceived, coordinated and delivered (Butler et al., 2016).New financial instruments can help to support investment in, for example, ecosystem-based adaptation. For example, green bonds can raise significant amounts of capital in support of projects with environmental/climate benefits. The green bond market has quickly developed since the European Investment Bank launched the first green bond in 2007, with issuance growing to USD 257.7 billion in 2019, up more than 50% on the previous year (CPI, 2019). Most green bonds focus on energy, buildings and transport infrastructure but green bond issuance to support sustainable agriculture and forestry has grown from USD 208 million in 2013 to USD 7.4 billion in 2018 (Wilkins, 2019). The Seychelles issued the world’s first ‘blue’ bond in 2018 with the support of the World Bank. Similar to green bonds, blue bonds earmark the use of bond proceeds for specific purposes, here the sustainable use of marine resources (World Bank, 2018). In 2019, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development issued the world’s first ever dedicated climate resilience bond, raising USD 700 million. The 5-year bond will be used to finance the Bank’s projects in climate-resilient infrastructure (e.g., water, energy and transport), climate-resilient business, commercial operations, climate-resilient agriculture and ecological systems (Bennett, 2019). While these issuances are still small compared to the overall green bond market, their rapid growth points to enormous opportunities for ecosystem-based adaptation.Despite the growth of official adaptation funding at international and national levels, for the world’s poorest, adaptation to the impacts and opportunities of climate change frequently occurs in response to L&Ds at the individual or household scale, without coordination at larger institutional scales (Section 8.3, 8.4; Barrett, 2014). Discussions of adaptation finance often occur in the context of dwindling resources and trade-offs: triage decisions about other investments that societies can tolerate suspending (Warner and Van der Geest, 2013; Tanner et al., 2015). In many poor, vulnerable countries, complex governance challenges, such as budget austerity or corruption, hamper the provision of such support. In the absence of adaptation funding for the poor, coordinated at higher scales, the costs of adaptation are borne by the poor at community, kin-group and household scales. Bearing the cost of adaptation, thus, can become, in the short term, an erosive process of coping that ultimately increases the likelihood that communities and households will remain trapped in poverty (Antwi-Agyei et al., 2018b). In the long term, measures financing adaptation may be maladaptive, meaning they ultimately leave the poor at greater risk of experiencing climate change impacts (Section 8.4.5; Rahman and Hickey, 2019). Such circumstances highlight the governance gap that drives the poorest to rely on extreme measures to finance adaptation.Since the AR5, there is greater documentation of the extreme measures and high-risk income alternatives that the world’s poorest commonly take to finance adaptation (Dawson, 2017; Ahmed et al., 2019). While still a controversial topic, clear examples of extreme adaptation finance measures include:Unauthorised international migration (McLeman, 2018)Informal small-scale mining of precious metals and minerals (Hilson and Van Bockstael, 2012; Osumanu, 2020)Illegal poaching of flora and fauna, including participation in illegal timber harvesting (Bolognesi et al., 2015)Illegal, unregulated or unreported fishing, including within marine protected areas, or the coastal zones of neighbouring countries (Tanner et al., 2014)Utilisation of livelihood resources, such as boats, in smuggling activities, including drug and arms trafficking (Belhabib et al., 2020)Participation in piracy, extortion or kidnapping economies (Staff, 2017).Enabling conditions for formal adaptation finance for the poorest are needed to reduce reliance on high-risk, extra-legal sources of income (see Section 8.5.2). In general, the antidote to this emerging problem is access to living wages that the poor can rely on to finance adaptation. There are few examples of pro-poor mechanisms, programmes or institutions that prioritise coordinated, access to credit for proactively adapting livelihoods of the poor (Agrawal and Perrin, 2009). Institutions can reduce incentives for vulnerable people to engage in high-risk activities by including them in the process of adaptation governance, which aims not only to support sustainable livelihood practices (such as farming, fishing and forestry), but also to guarantee land tenure (Wrathall et al., 2019). Also critical for risk reduction to the poor is the ability of authorities across multiple spatial and temporal scales to maintain social protection to reduce the dependency of illegal sources of income and facilitate adaptation (Tenzing, 2020). A range of tools exists for opening access to credit to poor and marginalised people whose livelihoods are most vulnerable (Ribot, 2013): climate insurance tools that are designed and targeted at the poorest and which have been properly assessed to ensure that they do not undermine other coping strategies such as risk spreading, programmes that ease access or subsidise loans for adaptation, mobile banking and mobile-based financial and risk management tools, impact pay-outs in the form of direct transfers and institutional support for hometown associations. International governance arrangements, such as the Warsaw International Mechanism on Loss and Damage, might aim primarily to clear the financing gap between global financial and risk management institutions and the pocketbooks of the poorest (Wrathall et al., 2015).