On Feb. 7, several major newspapers carried stories of the declaration by NASA and NOAA that the past five years have been the warmest on record.
A new article in Nature Geoscience  describes an innovative approach employed to derive ice-mass changes  from GRACE data.
Multiple lines of independent evidence indicate humidity is rising and provides positive feedback.
The Greenland ice sheet is at least 400,000 years old and warming was not global when Europeans settled in Greeland 1,000 years ago
'On June 23, 1988, NASA scientist James Hansen testified before the House of Representatives that there was a strong "cause and effect relationship" between observed temperatures and human emissions into the atmosphere.
In addition, [climate models] ignore the fact that enriching the atmosphere with CO2 is beneficial
‘Summers keep getting hotter,’ said Friederike Otto of the University of Oxford, who conducted extensive research into data from the heatwave that spread Europe in June, July and August 2017.
Most likely the primary control knob on climate change is the ocean waters and this environment that we live in.
But the central message of the IPCC AR4, is confirmed by the peer reviewed literature.
The trend in CO2 at Mauna Loa is practically identical to the global trend because CO2 mixes well throughout the atmosphere.
The ­atmospheric residency time of carbon dioxide is five years
Societies do fall apart from war, disease or chaos.
Currently, humans are emitting around 29 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere per year.
Severe storms, floods and agricultural losses may cost a great deal of money, but such extreme weather events—and their resulting costs—are dramatically declining as the Earth modestly warms.
However, weather imposes its own dramatic ups and downs over the long term trend.
If the same eruptions had happened near the more recent end of the dataset, they could have pushed the overall trend into negative numbers, or a long-term cooling,’ Christy said.”
For example, geothermal energy is available at all times, concentrated solar thermal energy has storage capability, and wind energy can be stored in compressed air.
It has occurred during the warmest year on record, which occurred in 2015, and the two most unusually mild months on Earth, which took place in January and February, respectively.”
Germany managed to increase its use of renewables and its output of carbon dioxide at the same time -- because it resorted to cheap coal to keep the lights on at a price its people could afford.
Modellers assume carbon dioxide drives climate change
Ocean levels have been rising for the last 20,000 years[…] No climate scientist can tell you when natural sea level rise stopped and man-made sea level rise began.
Only very few peer-reviewed papers even go so far as to say that recent warming is chiefly anthropogenic.
A World Heritage site, it is currently under assault from unusually hot ocean temperatures,”
During a state House debate on a jobs and energy bill this week, Democrats offered an amendment that would put the Legislature on record saying that climate change is real and that humans are causing it.
Sending oscillating microwaves from an antenna inside a vacuum through an electromagnetic field through a dielectric material, such as water, creates radio frequency heating at the molecular level
The current debate on the connection between CO2 emissions and climate change has largely overlooked an independent and equally serious problem, the increasing acidity of our oceans.
ever since December temperatures in the Arctic have consistently been lower than minus 20 C
"The IPCC also made false predictions on the Amazon rain forests, referenced to a non peer-reviewed paper produced by an advocacy group working with the WWF.
You're going to have an increase in the amount of ice in Antarctica because of global warming.
The rapid changes in the climate may have profound consequences for humans and other species… Severe drought caused food shortages for millions of people in Ethiopia, with a lack of rainfall resulting in “intense and widespread” forest fires in Indonesia that belched out a vast quantity of greenhouse gas
Currently, sea-level rise does not seem to depend on ocean temperature, and certainly not on CO2.
We're coming out of the Little Ice Age
‘The dry periods are drier and the wet periods are wetter,’ said Jeffrey Mount, a water expert and senior fellow at the Public Policy Institute of California.
Also, it is increasingly clear that the planet was significantly warmer than today several times during the past 10,000 years.
Trump's action could push the Earth over the brink, to become like Venus, with a temperature of two hundred and fifty degrees, and raining sulphuric acid.
"Three recent articles give us reason to question the alarmists’ claims  that coral reefs are in deep trouble due to the buildup of greenhouse  gases." (World Climate Report)
Scientists retracted claim that sea levels are rising.
Less energy is escaping to space: Carbon dioxide (CO2) acts like a blanket; adding more CO2 makes the 'blanket' thicker, and humans are adding more CO2 all the time.
"[T]he influence of  so-called greenhouse gases on near-surface temperature - is not yet  absolutely proven.
Famine, economic collapse, a sun that cooks us: What climate change could wreak — sooner than you think.
There is no single continuous satellite measurement of Total Solar Irradiance (TSI).
(2009) have demonstrated recently  – the upper troposphere (the only place where adding CO2 to the  atmosphere could make any difference to temperature) is considerably  drier than the models are tuned to expect."
There is long-term correlation between CO2 and global temperature; other effects are short-term.
Measurements of carbon isotopes and falling oxygen in the atmosphere show that rising carbon dioxide is due to the burning of fossil fuels and cannot be coming from the ocean.
At that time, Hansen also produced a model of the future behavior of the globe’s temperature, which he had turned into a video movie that was heavily shopped in Congress.
"Pollution; none of us are supporting putting substances into the  atmosphere or the waterways that might be pollutants, but carbon dioxide  is not a pollutant.
carbon dioxide has had a minuscule effect on global climate.
But by far the largest greenhouse gas is water vapour, which makes 95 per cent of the total.
Global sea level rose about 8 inches in the last century.
[CO2] is also a greenhouse gas which helps maintain earth at a habitable temperature.
