The overall solution would be to develop a resilient energy system and avoid the risk of unsustainable energy growth in developing Asia. This requires that strategic planning be consistent with the long-term climate projection, impact and adaptation (EUEI-PDF, 2017). Although no single policy package would be applicable for all the countries across the region, several measures could be addressed as the common options, including fortification of energy infrastructure and diversification of the sources by sufficient investment, improvement of energy efficiency for sector flexibility, and promotion of regional cooperation and integration for increasing energy security (UNESCAP, 2018b). Adaptation also includes promoting renewable energy resources, securing local natural gas resources, enhancing water production and adopting green-building technologies. These adaptation measures may help increase readiness for the anticipated impact of climate change.The improvement of energy efficiency and demand-side management can alleviate supply constraints and thus lower overall required-energy capacity. Energy storage, smart grids for the electricity network as well as other flexible management measures enable this energy demand shifting. Regional integration of energy markets drives productivity increase, cost reduction, new investment, human capability and diversity of energy sources (WEC, 2018). For example, better interconnection of natural gas supply networks among the ASEAN countries enhances gas security in the region. The development of the long-planned regional power grid would make large-scale renewable projects more viable and aid the integration of rising shares of wind and solar power (IEA, 2017).Providing enough investment in energy supply is a top priority to extend the connections to those without access to electricity and satisfy the soaring demand (IEA, 2017). The investment in non-fossil energies like renewables has been expanding to leverage the economic growth in China, India and Republic of Korea. According to the updated estimate of ADB, 14.7 trillion USD will be needed for the infrastructure development in the power sector of developing Asia over the 15 years from 2016 to 2030 (ADB, 2017a). The cumulative investment needs of ASEAN for energy supply and efficiency up to 2040 is estimated at 2.7 to 2.9 trillion USD (IEA, 2017). Mobilising investment to such a scale will require significant participation from the private sector and international financial institutions.Diversifying energy sources increases energy security and thus the resilience of the whole system. The deployment of renewable energy is widely recognised as a crucial measure for enhancing energy access and diversity. There remains huge potential for renewable sources in Asia (i.e., India has massive solar power potential) (Shukla et al., 2017). Many renewable technologies (i.e., hydro- and wind power as well as solar photovoltaics) are becoming competitive, and their life-cycle costs may fall below those of coal and natural gas in the near term. Great progress has been made in enhanced geothermal systems (EGS), and in the conventional and unconventional fusion power that China is promoting. Conventional and underground pumped hydropower will level out supplies for intermittent renewable energy generation.Substantial progress may be fulfilled by increasing the share of renewable energy in the overall energy consumption of Asia (ADB, 2017a). Access to energy, particularly in rural areas, can reduce climate vulnerability of developing Asia. Due to the high cost of extending the electricity network to rural regions, an alternative way is to develop the off-grid renewable energy systems in these areas. The distributed, instead of centralised, energy systems can increase energy access and resilience (EUEI-PDF, 2017).Some countries in the Arabian Peninsula, such as the United Arab Emirates (UAE), are adopting an array of approaches to enhance the adaptive capacity of the energy infrastructure and diffuse the risk of climate change over a larger area (e.g., energy efficiency, demand management, storm planning for power plants). In Al Mashrek, building institutional capacity in the energy sector is a necessary first step to mainstream climate-change adaptation (CCA). Countries such as Lebanon and Jordan have already made progress in mainstreaming CCA into electricity infrastructure. In the UAE, buildings account for more than 80% of the total electricity consumption. There are currently a set of measures and regulations on building conditions and specifications that are being applied to increase energy efficiency in buildings, but the rehabilitation and upgrading of old buildings still require further efforts (Environment, 2015). In Kuwait, one adaptation measure to dust storms is through the reduction of the proportion of open-desert land from 75 to 51%, the increase in protected areas from 8 to 18% and greenbelt projects in desert areas (Kuwait, 2015). Addressing climate-change impact on energy systems in Lebanon, Jordan, Syria, Iraq and Palestine needs to simultaneously consider other interlinked challenges of population growth, rapid urbanisation, refugee influx, conflict and geopolitical location. To address these challenges and provide solutions for CCA, the promotion of multi-stakeholder partnerships is key to breaking the silo approach.These CCA measures need to be broadened to fit the scope and depth of mitigation efforts by each country. Risk assessments and vulnerability assessments are in their early stages in the energy and industrial sectors, and are not currently based on a comprehensive plan of action. The first step is to undertake comprehensive national assessments of the risks associated with climate change based on existing studies on climate impacts and risks, and by making evidence-based decisions on adaptation actions.