Policies and actions at multiple scales and the participation of actors from all social groups, including the most exposed and vulnerable populations, are critical elements for effective adaptation (high confidence). Engaging social movements and local actors in policymaking and planning for adaptation generate positive synergies and better results. Adaptation policies and programmes that consider age, socioeconomic status, race and ethnicity are more efficient because these factors determine vulnerability and potential benefits of adaptation. Socioeconomic and political factors that provide some level of safety and continuity of policies and actions are critical enablers of adaptation (high confidence). {12.5.1, 12.5.2, 12.5.7, 12.5.8, 12.6.4}The knowledge and awareness of climate change as a threat have been increasing since AR5 due to the increasing frequency and magnitude of extreme weather events in the region, information available and climate justice activism (high confidence). Conflicts in which the direct biophysical impacts of climate change play a major role can unleash protests and strengthen social movements (medium confidence). {12.5.8, 12.6.4}Research approaches that integrate IKLK systems with natural and social sciences have increased since AR5 (high confidence)  and are helping to improve decision-making processes in the region, reduce maladaptation and foster transformational adaptation through the integration with ecosystem-based adaptation and community-based adaptation (high confidence). {12.5.1, 12.5.8, 12.6.2}The most widely reported obstacle to adaptation in terrestrial, freshwater, ocean and coastal ecosystems is financing (high confidence). There is also a significant gap in identifying limits to adaptation and weak institutional capacity for implementation. This hinders the development of comprehensive adaptation programmes, even under adequate funding. {12.5.1, 12.5.2}The use of climate-smart agriculture technologies strengthening synergies among productivity and mitigation is rising as an important adaptation strategy in the region (high confidence). Pertinent information for farmers provided by climate information services is facilitating the understanding of the role of climate compared with other drivers in perceived productivity changes. Index insurance builds resilience and contributes to adaptation by protecting farmers’ assets in the face of major climate shocks, by promoting access to credit and by the adoption of improved farm technologies and practices. {12.5.4}Institutional instability, fragmented services and poor water management, inadequate governance structures, insufficient data and analysis of adaptation experience are barriers to addressing the water challenges in the region (high confidence). {12.5.3}Inequality, poverty and informality shaping cities in the region increase vulnerability to climate change, while policies, plans or interventions addressing these social challenges with inclusive approaches represent opportunities for adaptation (high confidence)  . Initiatives to improve informal and precarious settlement, guaranteeing access to land and decent housing, are aligned with comprehensive adaptation policies that include the development and reduction of poverty, inequality and disaster risk (medium confidence). {12.5.5, 12.5.7}Adaptation policies often address climate impact drivers, but seldom include the social and economic underpinnings of vulnerability. This narrow scope limits adaptation results and compromises their continuity in the region (high confidence). In a context of unaddressed underdevelopment, adaptation policies tackling poverty and inequality are marginal, underfunded and not clearly included at national, regional or urban levels. Dialogue and agreement that include multiple actors are mechanisms to acknowledge trade-offs and promote dynamic, site-specific adaptation options (medium confidence). {12.5.7}