Analysis of the NDCs to the Paris Agreement to determine how health was incorporated, including impacts, adaptation and co-benefits, concluded that most low- and middle-income countries referred to health in their NDC (Dasandi et al., 2021). Figure 7.13 shows the degree of health engagement; this engagement is based on indicators measuring the specificity and detail of health references within a country’s NDC. Many vulnerable countries had high engagement of the health sector in the country NDC. However, this analysis did not determine whether the ambition expressed was sufficient to address the health adaptation needs.Figure 7.13 | Health engagement score in NDCs by country. Figure adapted from Dasandi et al. (2021).Open figure The 2018 WHO Health and Climate Change Survey, a voluntary national survey sent to all 194 WHO member states, to which 101 responded, found that national planning on health and climate change is advancing, but the comprehensiveness of strategies and plans need to be strengthened. Implementing action on key health and climate change priorities remains challenging and multi-sectoral collaboration on health and climate change policy is evident, with uneven progress (Watts et al., 2021). Approximately 50% of respondent countries had developed national health and climate strategies, with over two-thirds doing so within the preceding five years, and 48 of 101 countries had conducted a health vulnerability and adaptation assessment (Watts et al., 2019). However, most countries reported only moderate or low levels of implementation, with financing cited as the most common barrier due to a lack of information on opportunities, in turn linked to a lack of connection by health actors to climate change policy processes and a lack of capacity to participate in national planning. A review of public health systems in 34 countries found that only slightly more than half considered climate change impacts and adaptation needs (Berry et al., 2018). Because the health risks of climate change often vary within a country, sub-national assessments and plans are needed to help local authorities protect and promote population health in a changing climate (Aracena et al., 2021; Basel et al., 2020; Schramm et al., 2020a).