The importance of seafood in food security and nutrition is increasing, largely due to its contribution as high-quality food (high confidence) (Hicks et al., 2019), as seafood contains unique long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-PUFAs) and highly bioavailable essential micronutrients—vitamins (A, B and D) and minerals (calcium, phosphorus, iodine, zinc, iron and selenium). These compounds, often not readily available elsewhere in diets, have beneficial effects for adult health and child cognitive development (HLPE, 2014). Changes in marine and freshwater fish production can have significant consequences for human nutrition (Colombo et al., 2020). These changes are of particular concern in regions with few nutrition alternatives, such as low-income countries in Africa, Asia, Australasia, and Central and South America (high confidence) (Ding et al., 2017; Kibria et al., 2017).Freshwater ecosystems that support most inland fisheries are under continuing threat from changes in land use, water availability and pollution and other pressures that will be exacerbated by climate change (high confidence) (Section 4.3.5). Declines in dissolved oxygen in freshwater are 2.75–9.3 times greater than observed in the world’s oceans (Jane et al., 2021). These systems have a relatively low buffering capacity and are therefore more sensitive to climate-related shocks and variability (Harrod et al., 2018b). Freshwater faunae are projected to be highly vulnerable; in the tropics because organisms are closer to approaching their thermal physiological limits and in the northern hemisphere (30–50°N) because the rate of temperature change is faster (Comte and Olden, 2017). The worldwide spatial confluence of productive freshwater fisheries and low food security highlights the critical role of rivers and lakes in providing locally sourced, low-cost, nutritious food sources (McIntyre et al., 2016).Deltas and other wetland fisheries are extremely vulnerable to climate change and home to a large and growing proportion of the world’s population. In India, Ghana and Bangladesh, where three of the most populated Deltaic systems are located, subsistence fisheries provide 12–60% of the animal protein in people’s diets (Lauria et al., 2018).The concern over aquatic food products’ safety due to climate change is increasing (high confidence). A strong positive relationship exists between specific bacterial growth rates and temperature, including pathogenic species of the genera Vibrio, Listeria, Clostridium, Aeromonas, Salmonella, Escherichia and others, whose distributional area is expanding with changing climate conditions (Cross-Chapter Box ILLNESS in Chapter 2, Section 5.12.1).