The most important quantity used to characterize past and future climate change is global warming relative to its pre-industrial level. Changes in global warming are linked quasi-linearly to global cumulative carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions (IPCC, 2013), and for their part, changes in regional climate, including many types of extremes, scale quasi-linearly with changes in global warming, often independently of the underlying emissions scenarios (SR1.5 Chapter 3; Seneviratne et al., 2016; Matthews et al., 2017; Wartenburger et al., 2017; Kharin et al., 2018; Y. Sun et al., 2018a; Tebaldi and Knutti, 2018; Beusch et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021). In addition, the use of global warming levels in the context of global policy documents – in particular the 2015 Paris Agreement (UNFCCC, 2016) implies that information on changes in the climate system, and specifically extremes, as a function of global warming are of particular policy relevance. Cross-Chapter Box 11.1 provides an overview on the translation between information at global warming levels (GWLs) and scenarios.The assessment of projections of future changes in extremes as function of GWL has an advantage in separating uncertainty associated with the global warming response (see Chapter 4) from the uncertainty resulting from the regional climate response as a function of GWLs (Seneviratne and Hauser, 2020). If the interest is in the projection of regional changes at certain GWLs, such as those defined by the Paris Agreement, projections based on time periods and emissions scenarios have unnecessarily larger uncertainty due to differences in model global transient climate responses. To take advantage of this feature and to provide easy comparison with SR1.5, assessments of projected changes in this chapter are largely provided in relation to future GWLs, with a focus on changes at +1.5°C, +2°C, and +4°C of global warming above pre-industrial levels (e.g., Tables 11.1 and 11.2 and regional tables in Section 11.9). These encompass a scenario compatible with the lowest limit of the Paris Agreement (+1.5°C), a scenario slightly overshooting the aims of the Paris Agreement (+2°C), and a ‘worst-case’ scenario with no mitigation (+4°C). Cross-Chapter Box 11.1 provides a background on the GWL sampling approach used in AR6, for the computation of GWL projections from climate models contributing to Phase 6 of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP6) as well as for the mapping of existing scenario-based literature for CMIP6 and the CMIP Phase 5 (CMIP5) to assessments as function of GWLs (see also Section 11.9. and Table 11.3 for an example).While regional changes in many types of extremes do scale robustly with global surface temperature, generally irrespective of emissions scenarios (Section 11.1.4, Figures 11.3, 11.6 and 11.7 and Cross-Chapter Box 11.1), effects of local forcing can distort this relation. For example, emissions scenarios with the same radiative forcing can have different regional extreme precipitation responses resulting from different aerosol forcing (Z. Wang et al., 2017b). Another example is related to forcing from land-use and land cover changes (Section 11.1.6). Climate models often either overestimate or underestimate observed changes in annual maximum daily maximum temperature, depending on the region and considered models (Donat et al., 2017; Vautard et al., 2020). Part of the discrepancies may be due to the lack of representation of some land forcings, in particular crop intensification and irrigation (N.D. Mueller et al., 2016; Findell et al., 2017; Thiery et al., 2017, 2020). Since these local forcings are not represented, and their future changes are difficult to project, these can be important caveats when using GWL scaling to project future changes for these regions. However, these caveats also apply to the use of scenario-based projections.The SR1.5 (Chapter 3) assessed different climate responses at +1.5°C of global warming, including transient climate responses, short-term stabilization responses, and long-term equilibrium stabilization responses, and their implications for future projections of different extremes. Indeed, the temporal dimension – that is, when the given GWL occurs – also matters for projections, in particular beyond the 21st century, and for some climate variables related to components of the climate system associated with large inertia (e.g., sea level rise and associated extremes). Nonetheless, for assessments focused on conditions within the next decades, and for the main extremes considered in this chapter, derived projections are relatively insensitive to details of climate scenarios and can be well-estimated based on transient simulations (Cross-Chapter Box 11.1; see also SR1.5).An important question is the identification of the GWL at which a given change in a climate extreme can begin to emerge from climate noise. Figure 11.8 displays analyses of the GWLs at which emergence in hot extremes – annual maximum daily temperature represented by TXx and heavy precipitation represented by Rx1day is identified in AR6 regions for the whole CMIP5 and CMIP6 ensembles. Overall, signals for extremes emerge very early for TXx, already below 0.2°C in many regions (Figure 11.8a,b), and at around 0.5°C in most regions. This is consistent with conclusions from the SR1.5 (Chapter 3 for less-rare temperature extremes (TXx on the yearly time scale), which shows that a difference as small as 0.5°C of global warming – for example, between +1.5°C and +2°C of global warming – leads to detectable differences in temperature extremes in TXx in most WGI AR6 regions in CMIP5 projections (e.g., Wartenburger et al., 2017; Seneviratne et al., 2018b). The GWL emergence for Rx1day is also largely consistent with analyses for less-extreme heavy precipitation events (Rx5day on the yearly time scale) in SR1.5 (see Chapter 3).Figure 11.8 | Global and regional-scale emergence of changes in temperature (a) and precipitation (b) extremes for the globe (glob.), global oceans (oc.), global lands (land), and the AR6 regions. Colours indicate the multi-model mean global warming level at which the difference in 20-year means of the annual maximum daily maximum temperature (TXx) and the annual maximum daily precipitation (Rx1day) become significantly different from their respective mean values during the 1850–1900 base period. Results are based on simulations from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phases 5 and 6 (CMIP5 and CMIP6) multi-model ensembles. See Atlas.1.3.2 for the definition of regions. Adapted from Seneviratne and Hauser (2020) under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence. Open figureTo some extent, analyses as functions of GWLs replace the time axis with a global surface temperature axis. Nonetheless, information on the timing of given changes in extremes is obviously also relevant. (For information on the time frame at which given GWLs are reached, see Cross-Chapter Box 11.1 and Section 4.6). Figure 11.5 provides a synthesis of attributed and projected changes in extremes as function of GWLs (see also Figures. 11.3, 11.6 and 11.7 for regional analyses).