Across this diverse group of cropping systems, distinct adaptation options and adaptation limits have emerged (Figure 5.10; Acevedo et al., 2020; Berrang-Ford et al., 2021b). Some crop types have already seen widescale implementation of climate adaptation (e.g., grapevines), while others show little evidence of preparation for climate change (e.g., leafy salad crops). Many adaptation responses are shared with the major crops, but prominent options such as plant breeding are underutilised and there is a lack of evidence for assessing adaptation for many crops (Bisbis et al., 2018; Gunathilaka et al., 2018; Manners and van Etten, 2018). Figure 5.10 assesses several adaptation options based on the perceived importance of each in the literature. Fruit and vegetable crops tend to be more reliant on ecosystem services in the form of pollination, biocontrol and other resources (water, nutrients, microbes, etc.), and ecosystem-based adaptation options are prominent. The range of crops means that there is great potential for crop switching, but cultural and economic barriers will make such options difficult to implement, with barriers to entry for production and marketing (Waha et al., 2013; Magrini et al., 2016; Kongsager, 2017; Rhiney et al., 2018). Perennial crops are exposed to a wide range of climate factors throughout the year and have significant barriers to implementing some of the common adaptation options, such as relocation or replacing tree species/cultivar; agronomic interventions on-farm are well used in high-value tree crops and provide some climate resilience, but longer-term options will be needed (Glenn et al., 2013; Mosedale et al., 2016; Gunathilaka et al., 2018; Sugiura, 2019).Figure 5.10 | Synthesis of literature on the implementation of on-farm adaptation options across different cropping systems. Adaptation options that have been implemented by growers are considered ‘tested’, while those that have not are considered ‘untested’. Untested options are those that appear in studies as suggestions by stakeholder or experts but were not implemented within the study. The assessment draws on >200 articles published since AR5. The confidence is based on the evidence given in individual articles and on the number of articles. See SM5.2 for details.Open figure Many fruit and vegetable crops are water demanding, and adaptation responses relating to water management and access to irrigation water are crucial. Rainwater storage and deficit irrigation techniques are frequently mentioned as adaptation options and can minimise the burden on off-farm water supplies (Bisbis et al., 2018; Acevedo et al., 2020).