As with the broader innovation literature (Section 16.3), and drawing on such literature, there has been an emergence of a greater understanding of, and emphasis on, the role of innovation systems (at national, sectoral, and technological levels) as a way to help developing countries with the climate technology transition (TEC 2015; Ockwell and Byrne 2016). This has given rise to several proposals, discussed here and summarised in Figure 16.3.Figure 16.3 | Examples of recent mechanisms and emerging ideas (right column) in relation to level of maturity of the national or technological innovation system, objectives of international climate technology transfer efforts and current mechanisms and means.  Sources: Sagar (2009); Ockwell and Byrne (2016); Khan et al. (2020); Oberthür et al. (2021).Open figure Enhancing deployment and diffusion of climate technologies in developing countries would require a variety of actors with sufficient capabilities (robust evidence, medium agreement ) (Kumar et al. 1999; Sagar et al. 2009; Ockwell et al. 2018). This may include strengthening existing actors (Malhotra et al. 2021), supporting science, technology, and innovation-based start-ups to meet social goals (Surana et al. 2020b), and developing entities and programmes that are intended to address specific gaps relating to technology development and deployment (Sagar et al. 2009; Ockwell et al. 2018).There is also an increasing emphasis on the relevance of participative social innovation, local grounding and policy learning as a replacement of the expert-led technological change (Chaudhary et al. 2012; Disterheft et al. 2015; Kowarsch et al. 2016). Others have suggested a shift to international innovation cooperation rather than technology transfer, which implies a donor-recipient relationship. The notion of innovation cooperation also makes more explicit the focus on innovation processes and systems (Pandey et al. 2021). A broad transformative agenda therefore proposes that contemporary societal challenges are complex and multivariegated in scope and will require the actions of a diverse set of actors to formulate and address the policy, implying that social, institutional and behavioural changes next to technological innovations are the possible solutions (Geels 2004) (see also Cross-Chapter Box 12 in this chapter).Several authors have proposed new mechanisms for international cooperation on technology. Ockwell and Byrne (2016) argue that a role for the UNFCCC Technology Mechanism could be to support Climate Relevant Innovation-system Builders (CRIBs) in developing countries, institutions locally that develop capabilities that ‘form the bedrock of transformative, climate-compatible, technological change and development’. Khan et al. (2020) propose a specific variant with universities in developing countries serving as ‘central hubs’ for capacity building to implement the NDCs as well as other climate policy and planning instruments; they also suggest that developing countries outline their capacity-building needs more clearly in their NDCs.Building on an earlier discussion of technology-oriented and sectoral agreements (Meckling and Chung 2009) and the potential for international cooperation in energy-intensive industry (Åhman et al. 2017), where deep emission reduction measures require transformative changes (Chapter 11), Oberthür et al. (2021) propose that that a way forward for the global governance for energy-intensive industry could be through sub-sector ‘clubs’ that include governmental, private and societal actors (Oberthür et al. 2021).Figure 16.3 summarises examples of emerging ideas for international cooperation on climate technology, their relation to the objectives and existing efforts, and the level of development of the innovation system around a technology (Hekkert et al. 2007; Bergek et al. 2008) or in nations (Lundvall et al. 2009).