Conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem services is part of the larger objective of building climate resilience and promoting good quality of life, human well-being and sustainable development. While two of the 17 SDGs directly relate to nature (SDGs 14 and 15 covering marine and terrestrial ecosystems and biodiversity), most other SDGs relating to poverty, hunger, inequality, health and well-being, clean sanitation and water, energy, and so on, are directly or indirectly linked to nature (Blicharska et al. 2019). A survey among experts to assess how 16 ecosystem services could help in achieving the SDGs relating to good environment and human well-being suggested that ecosystem services could contribute to achieving about 41 targets across 12 SDGs (Wood et al. 2018). They also indicated cross-target interactions and synergetic outcomes across many SDGs. Conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem services is critical to sustaining the well-being and livelihoods of poor and marginalised people, and indigenous communities who depend on natural resources ( high confidence). Nature provides a broad array of goods and services that are critical to good quality of life and human well-being. Healthy and diverse ecosystems can play an important role in reducing vulnerability and building resilience to disasters and extreme weather events (SCBD 2009; The Royal Society Science Policy Centre 2014; Ninan and Inoue 2017).Current negative trends in biodiversity and ecosystem services will undermine progress towards achieving 80% (35 out of 44) of the assessed targets of SDGs related to poverty, hunger, health, water, cities, climate, oceans and land (IPBES 2019a). However, Reyers and Selig (2020) note that the assessment by (IPBES 2019a) could only assess the consequences of trends in biodiversity and ecosystem services for 35 out of the 169 SDG targets due to data and knowledge gaps, and lack of clarity about the relationship between biodiversity, ecosystem services and SDGs.Progress in achieving the 20 Aichi Biodiversity targets which are critical for realising the SDGs has been poor with most of the targets not being achieved or only partially realised (SCBD 2020). There could be synergies and trade-offs between ecosystem services and human well-being. For instance, a study notes that although policy interventions and incentives to enhance supply of provisioning services (e.g., agricultural production) have led to higher GDP, it may have an adverse effect on the regulatory services of ecosystems (Kirchner et al. 2015). However, we are aware of the inadequacies of traditional GDP as an indicator of well-being. In this context the Dasgupta Biodiversity Review argues for using the inclusive wealth approach to accurately measure social well-being by tracking the changes in produced, human and natural capital (Dasgupta 2021). Targets for nature (biodiversity and ecosystem services) should be refined so as to fit in with the metrics tracked by the SDGs (IPBES 2016; Rosa et al. 2017).