Water security encompasses multiple dimensions: water for sanitation and hygiene, food production, economic activities, ecosystems, water-induced disasters, and use of water for cultural purposes (Chapter 4; Box 4.1; Section 4.6.1). Water security risks are a combination of water-related hazards such as floods, droughts and water quality deterioration, and exposure of vulnerable groups exposed to too little, too much or contaminated water. Reasons for these can include both environmental conditions and issues of safety and access influenced by effectiveness of water governance (Sadoff et al., 2020). These are manifest through loss of lives, property, livelihoods and culture, and impacts on human health and nutrition, ecosystems and water-related conflicts which in turn can drive forced human displacement.This RKR focuses on three types of risks with the potential to become severe: those associated with water scarcity, those driven by water-related disasters, and those impacting indigenous and traditional cultures and ways of life. Risk to water security constitutes a potentially severe risk because climate change could impact the hydrologic cycle in ways that would lead to substantial consequences for the health, livelihoods, property and cultures of large numbers of people. For those associated with water scarcity, ‘severe’ refers to magnitude (number of people in areas where water scarcity falls below recognised thresholds for adequate water supply per capita), along with the likelihood of unforeseen increases in water scarcity that outpace the ability to prepare for the increased risk by putting in place new large-scale infrastructure within the required time scale. For those associated with extreme events, ‘severe’ refers to magnitude (numbers of people affected, including deaths, physical health impacts including disease, mental health impacts, loss of livelihoods, loss of or damage to property) and timing (e.g., events coinciding with other stresses, e.g., a pandemic occurring at a time when local infrastructures are weakened by an extreme weather event). Important water-related extreme events include river flooding caused by heavy and/or prolonged rainfall, glacial lake outburst floods, and droughts. For those impacting cultures, ‘severe’ refers to the loss of key aspects of traditional ways of life. This includes consequences of the above two KRs.Risks associated with water scarcity have the potential to become severe based on projections of large numbers of people becoming exposed to low levels of water availability per person, where ‘water availability’ includes fresh water in the landscape, including soil moisture and streamflows, available for all uses including agriculture as a dominant sector. Approximately 1.6 billion people currently experience ‘chronic’ water scarcity, defined as the availability of less than 1000 m 3 of renewable sources of fresh water per person per year (Gosling and Arnell, 2016). In this context, we define a severe outcome as an additional 1 billion people experiencing ‘chronic’ water scarcity, relating to all uses of water, representing an increase of a magnitude comparable to current levels. The global number of people experiencing chronic water scarcity is projected to increase by approximately 800 million to 3 billion for 2°C global warming, and up to approximately 4 billion for 4°C global warming, considering the effects of climate change alone, with a 9 billion population (Gosling and Arnell, 2016). Severe outcomes are projected to occur even with no changes in exposure: present-day exposure is defined here as ‘medium’ since either an increase or decrease in exposure could be possible. Vulnerability is not quantified in the literature assessed here, so in this assessment it is considered that severe outcomes could occur with present-day levels of vulnerability, again defined here as ‘medium’. Particularly severe outcomes (i.e., the high end of these ranges) are driven by regional patterns of climate change bringing severe reductions in precipitation and/or high levels of evapotranspiration in the most highly populated regions, leading to very substantial reductions in water availability compared with demand. There is strong consensus across models that water scarcity is projected to increase across substantial parts of the world even though projections disagree on which specific areas would see this impact. Moreover, a projected decrease in water scarcity in some regions does not prevent the increase in water scarcity in other regions becoming severe. Hence there is high confidence that risks to water scarcity have the potential to become severe due to climate change. Consequences of water scarcity include potential competition and conflicts between water users (Vanham et al., 2018), damaging livelihoods, hindering socioeconomic development and reducing human well-being, for example through malnutrition resulting from inadequate water supplies leading to long-term health impacts such as child stunting (Cooper et al., 2019). The avoidance of these consequences at high levels of water scarcity would require transformational adaptations including large-scale interventions such as dams and water transfer infrastructure (Greve et al., 2018). Since these require many years or even decades for planning and construction, and are also costly and irreversible and can potentially lead to lock-in and maladaptation, the potential for inadequate policy decisions made in the context of high uncertainties in regional climate changes brings the risk of a shortfall in adaptation. Around 2050, at approximately 2°C global warming, the risk of a substantial adaptation shortfall and hence severe outcomes for water scarcity have a relatively high likelihood across large parts of the southern USA and Mexico, northern Africa, parts of the Middle-East, northern China, and southern Australia, as well as many parts of Northwest India and Pakistan (Greve et al., 2018).Risks associated with water-related extreme events and disasters have the potential to become severe based on projections of large numbers of people or high values of assets being affected. The risks to people from disasters can often only be quantified in terms of the hazard and exposure (the number of people affected), rather than the full consequences such as number of deaths, injuries or other health outcomes, as these often depend on complex or unpredictable factors such as the effectiveness of emergency and humanitarian responses or the access to healthcare. With approximately 50 million people per year currently affected by flooding (Alfieri et al., 2017), we define severe outcomes as more than 100 million people affected by flooding. At 2°C global warming, between approximately 50 million and 150 million people are projected to be affected by flooding, with figures rising to 110 million to 330 million at 4°C global warming. These projections assume present-day population and no additional adaptation, so no changes in exposure. Increased flood risk is projected by the WHO to lead to an additional 48,000 deaths of children under 15 years due to diarrhoea by 2030, with Sub-Saharan Africa impacted the most (WHO, 2014). Other consequences of floods that already occur include deaths by drowning, loss of access to fresh water, vector-borne diseases, mental health impacts, loss of livelihoods and loss of or damage to property. Many of these consequences depend on the vulnerability of individuals, households or communities to flooding impacts, for example through the presence or absence of measures to safeguard health and livelihoods, such as through infrastructure services, insurance or community support. The risks associated with these consequences could increase if there were no local adaptations to counter the effect of increased levels of hazard by reducing exposure and/or vulnerability. Climate-related changes to extreme events that would lead to these severe outcomes include increased frequency and/or magnitude of river floods of flash floods due to heavy or long-lasting precipitation, rapid snowmelt, or catastrophic failure of glacial lake moraine dams. These climate conditions are projected to increase with global warming.Risks to cultural uses of water can become severe if there is permanent loss of aspects of communities’ cultures due to changes in water, including loss of areas of ice or snow with spiritual meanings, loss of culturally important places of access to such places, and loss of culturally important subsistence practices including by Indigenous People (Chapter 4). This includes mountain regions where changes in the cryosphere are having profound impacts (Cross-Chapter Paper 5). In these cases, severe outcomes would be defined locally rather than globally. Communities that lost a dominant environmental characteristic deeply associated with its cultural identity would be considered to be severely impacted. For example, due to the central role that travel on sea ice plays in the life of Inuit communities, providing freedom and mental well-being, loss of sea ice can be argued to represent environmental dispossession of these communities (Durkalec et al., 2015). Traditional ways of life are therefore threatened, and resulting changes would be transformative rather than adaptive. Similarly, changes in streamflow affecting the availability of species for traditional hunting can also negatively impact Indigenous communities (Norton-Smith et al.). Such changes are already being seen at current levels of warming, but studies remain somewhat limited in number, so this assessment is assigned medium confidence because of medium evidence and medium agreement. WGI conclude that it is virtually certain that further warming will lead to further reductions in Northern Hemisphere snow cover, and mass loss in individual glacier regions is projected to be between approximately 30% and 100% by 2100 under high-warming scenarios (Chapter 4). Streamflows are projected to change in most major river basins worldwide by several tens of percent at 4°C global warming (Chapter 4).There is strong potential for increases in water scarcity, flooding, loss of snow and ice and changes in water bodies to lead to severe outcomes such as deaths from water-related diseases, drowning and starvation, long-term health impacts arising from malnutrition and diseases, loss of property, loss of existence or access to places of cultural significance, loss of livelihoods and loss of aspects of culture especially for Indigenous People with traditional lifestyles. The numbers of people affected are projected to range from hundreds of millions to several billion, depending on the level of global warming and socioeconomic futures. A key aspect of the risk is the high uncertainty in future regional precipitation changes in many regions of high vulnerability, including the potential for large and highly impactful changes, for which it may not be possible to provide adaptation measures before they become needed, leading to a high likelihood of adaptation deficits.