Contributing Authors:  Sarah L. Connors (France/United Kingdom), Amanda Maycock (United Kingdom), Peter W. Thorne (Ireland/United Kingdom), Nicolas Bellouin (United Kingdom/France), Ingo Bethke (Norway/Germany), Deliang Chen (Sweden), Annalisa Cherchi (Italy), Alejandro Di Luca (Australia/Canada/Argentina), Piers Forster (United Kingdom), Nathan P. Gillett (Canada), Darrell S. Kaufmann (The United States of America), June-Yi Lee (Republic of Korea), Elizaveta Malinina (Canada/Russian Federation), Seung-Ki Min (Republic of Korea), Johannes Quaas (Germany), Alex C. Ruane (The United States of America), Jean-Baptiste Sallée (France), Sonia I. Seneviratne (Switzerland), Chris Smith (United Kingdom), Matthew Toohey (Canada, Germany/Canada), Andrew Turner (United Kingdom), Cunde Xiao (China), Tianjun Zhou (China)Before the industrial period, explosive volcanic eruptions were the largest source of forced climate variability globally on interannual to centennial time scales (Section 2.2). While usually omitted from scenarios used for future climate projections, as they are unpredictable, volcanic eruptions have the potential to influence future climate on multi-annual to decadal time scales and affect many climatic impact drivers (as defined in Sections 12.1 and 12.3). Since AR5, more comprehensive paleo evidence and observations, as well as improved modelling have advanced understanding of the climate response to past volcanic eruptions. Building on multiple chapter assessments, this box synthesizes how volcanic eruptions affect climate and considers implications of possible future events.How frequent are volcanic eruptions?Proxy records show that large volcanic eruptions with effective radiative forcing (ERF) more negative than –1 W m–2 occurred on average twice a century throughout the last 2500 years, the most recent being Pinatubo in 1991 (Section 2.2.2). About eight larger eruptions (ERF stronger than –5 W m–2) also occurred during this period (Figure 2.2), notably Tambora about 1815 and Samalas about 1257. A Samalas-type eruption may occur one to two times per millennium on average (Newhall et al., 2018). Typically, three in every four centuries have experienced at least one eruption stronger than –1 W m–2 (Pinatubo or larger). The volcanic aerosol burden was 14% lower during the 20th century compared to the average of the preceding 24 centuries (Section 2.2.2), whereas the 13th century was among the most volcanically active, with four eruptions exceeding that of Pinatubo-1991 (Sigl et al., 2015).Past climate responses to volcanic activityMajor eruptions drive a range of climate system responses for several years depending upon whether the eruption occurs in the tropics (stratospheric aerosol dispersion into both hemispheres) or the extratropics (dispersion into the hemisphere of eruption) owing to the Brewer-Dobson circulation. The climatic response also depends on the effective injection height, sulphur mass injected, and time of year of the eruption (Marshall et al., 2019, 2020). These factors determine the total mass, lifetime and optical properties of volcanic aerosol in the stratosphere and influence the stratospheric aerosol optical depth (SAOD). The ERF from volcanic stratospheric aerosol is assessed to be –20 ± 5 W m–2 per unit sAOD (Section 7.3.4.6).Due to the direct radiative effect of volcanic stratospheric aerosols, large volcanic eruptions lead to an overall decrease of GSAT, which can extend to multi-decadal or century time scales in the case of clustered volcanism (Section 3.3.1.1; Schurer et al., 2013; McGregor et al., 2015; Sigl et al., 2015; Kobashi et al., 2017; Zambri et al., 2017; Brönnimann et al., 2019; Neukom et al., 2019). Large eruptions also increase the frequency of extremely cold individual years and the likelihood of cooling trends occurring in individual decades (Cross-Chapter Box 3.1 and Section 4.4.4; Paik and Min, 2018). Re-dating of ice core chronologies now confirms that the coldest decades of the past approximately 2000 years are the outcome of volcanic eruptions (Sigl et al., 2015; Büntgen et al., 2016; Toohey et al., 2016; Neukom et al., 2019). CMIP5 and CMIP6 models reproduce the decreased GSAT that follows periods of intense volcanism. New reconciliations between simulations and proxy-based reconstructions of past eruptions have been achieved through better Earth System Model representation of volcanic plume chemical compositions (Legrande et al., 2016; Marshall et al., 2020; F. Zhu et al., 2020). Yet, remaining disagreements reflect differences in the volcanic forcing datasets used in the simulations (medium confidence) (Section 3.3.1.1 and Figure 3.2c).Although incomplete, proxy records show large impacts upon contemporary society from eruptions such as 1257 Samalas and 1815 Tambora, the latter resulting in ‘the year without a summer’ with multiple harvest failures across the Northern Hemisphere (e.g., Raible et al., 2016). Comparing CMIP5 multi-model simulations with observations has improved understanding of the hydrological responses to 20th century eruptions, particularly global land monsoon drying, and associated uncertainties (Section 3.3.2.3). Global mean land precipitation decreases for up to a few years following the eruption, with climatologically wet regions drying and dry regions wetting (Sections 3.3.2.3 and 4.4.4). Changes in monsoon circulations occur with a general weakening of tropical precipitation (Section 8.5.2.3) and a decrease in extreme precipitation over global monsoon regions (Section 11.4.4). Monsoon precipitation in one hemisphere tends to be enhanced by eruptions occurring in the other hemisphere or reduced if they occur in the same hemisphere (Sections 3.3.2.3 and 8.5.2.3). Volcanic eruptions have been linked to the onset of El Niñofollowed by La Niña although this connection remains contentious (Adams et al., 2003; Bradley et al., 2003; McGregor et al., 2010; Khodri et al., 2017; F. Liu et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2019;Paik et al., 2020; Predybaylo et al., 2020). Volcanic activity could drive short-term (one-to-three-year) positive changes in the annual SAM index through modulations in the extratropical temperature gradient and wave driving of the polar stratosphere (Yang and Xiao, 2018). In the cryosphere, Arctic sea ice extent increases for years to decades (Gagné et al., 2017a), and modelling indicates that sea ice/ocean feedbacks can prolong cooling long after volcanic aerosols are removed (Miller et al., 2012). On annual time scales, the ocean buffers the atmospheric response to volcanic eruptions by storing the cooling in the ocean subsurface, then feeding it back to the atmosphere. Large eruptions affect ocean heat content and thermosteric sea level over decadal-to-centennial scales (Section 9.2.2.1).Potential implications on 21st century projectionsGiven the unpredictability of individual eruptions, volcanic forcing is prescribed as a constant background loading in CMIP6 models (Eyring et al., 2016). This means the effects of potential large volcanic eruptions are largely absent from model projections, and few studies have addressed the potential implications on 21st century warming. One study considered future scenarios with hypothetical volcanic eruptions consistent with levels of Common Era volcanic activity (Bethke et al., 2017) under RCP4.5 and found that climate projections could be substantially altered (Cross-Chapter Box 4.1, Figure 1). Although temporary, close to pre-industrial level temperatures could be experienced globally for a few years after a 1257 Samalas-sized eruption. Several other key climate indicators are also changed substantially, consistent with evidence from past events. Bethke et al. (2017) suggest that an eruption early in the 21st century could delay the timing of crossing 1.5°C global warming by several years. Clustered eruptions would have substantial impact upon GSAT evolution throughout the century (Cross-Chapter Box 4.1, Figure 1), and could have far-reaching implications, as observed for past eruptions. For near-term response options, decadal prediction models can update 21st-century projections once a volcanic eruption occurs (Timmreck et al., 2016). Cross-Chapter Box 4.1, Figure 1 | Potential impact of volcanic eruption on future global temperature change. CMIP5 projections of possible 21st-century futures under RCP4.5 after a 1257 Samalas magnitude volcanic eruption in 2044, from Bethke et al. (2017).  (a)  Volcanic ERF of the most volcanically active ensemble member, estimated from SAOD.  (b) Annual mean global surface air temperature. Ensemble mean (solid) of future projections including volcanoes (blue) and excluding volcanoes (red) with 5–95% range (shading) and ensemble minima/maxima (dots); evolution of the most volcanically active member (black). Data created using a SMILE approach with NorESM1 in its CMIP5 configuration. See Sections 2.2.2 and 4.4.4 for more details. Further details on data sources and processing are available in the chapter data table (Table 4.SM.1).Open figure SummaryIt is likely that at least one large eruption will occur during the 21st century. Such an eruption would reduce GSAT for several years, decrease global mean land precipitation, alter monsoon circulation, modify extreme precipitation, and change the profile of many regional climatic impact-drivers. A low-likelihood, high-impact outcome would be several large eruptions that would greatly alter the 21st century climate trajectory compared to SSP-based ESM projections.