Adaptation options are highly diverse and sector specific (EPA, 2017). Regardless of economic sector, companies that implement effective and rapid response options that address climate change stressors will have a competitive advantage (Gasbarro et al., 2016, Lemmen, 2021). Most companies focus on short-term risk management and, consequently, short-term adaptation is often favoured over long-term approaches particularly in the private sector, which will be ineffective for climate-change risk reduction over the long term (Gasbarro et al., 2016).Investment and coordination of climate services (forecasting) can support many economic sectors across North America. In 2017, 15% of Standard and Poor’s (S&P, US industry credit rating agency) 500 companies publicly disclosed an effect on earnings from weather events, reflecting a growing trend (Williams et al., 2018). Existing US federal-sponsored planning tools provide guidance to states and to plan for SLR and flooding with large threats to commercial sectors (US Department of Transportation, 2015). The NOAA Coastal Services Center SLR and coastal inundation viewer 7, 3  the Army Corps of Engineers Sea Level Change Curve simulator, and Climate Central’s interactive portal (Ocean at the Door) all provide access to visualisations of future SLR that are available to US coastal cities and towns for commercial planning purposes. Similar resources are being developed and are available for Canada including Canada’s Climate Atlas 8. 4 Adaptation options for transportation and related infrastructure include engineering and technological solutions, as well as innovative policy, planning, management and maintenance approaches (Natural Resources Conservation Service, 2008; Jacobs et al., 2018). For northern transportation, new technologies and infrastructure adaptations can be employed to facilitate heat extraction (e.g., air convection embankments, heat drains, thermosyphons, high albedo surfacing, gentle embankment slopes) (McGregor et al., 2010b; United Nations, 2020) Adaptation options for roads include changing pavement mixes to be more tolerant to heat or frost heaving, expanding drainage capacity, reducing flood risks, enhancing travel advisories and alerts, elevating or relocating new infrastructure where feasible and changing infrastructure design requirements to include climate-change considerations or to introduce new flood event thresholds (Natural Resources Conservation Service, 2008; EPA, 2017; Pendakur, 2017). Railroads are testing temperature sensors on rail tracks to provide early warning of buckling. Sensors that signal when tracks are approaching dangerous temperatures may help to avoid accidents (Hodge et al., 2014; Chinowsky et al., 2019). Adapting building codes more uniformly to changing climate conditions, such as SLR, storms, winds and wildfires, reduces risk (Olsen, 2015; Maxwell et al., 2018b). North America has not, on the whole, adapted its building code regulations to consider the dynamic challenges of climate change, although some specific efforts have been made, including the addition of requirements for wildfire within California’s building codes and Canada’s climate-resilient building and core public infrastructure initiative, which involves updating building codes and standards to improve climate resiliency (see Box 14.4; Lacasse et al., 2020). To enhance safety, some outdoor workers have been fitted with heat sensors to analyse or assess how warming may affect productivity and well-being (Runkle et al., 2019). Other options include raising public roads and seawalls, initiating buy-outs of property owners in flood risk areas and improving storm water drainage. Adopting approaches like the International Future Living Institute’s Living Building Challenge (LBC) may inform future regulatory processes (Eisenberg, 2016). The LBC95  has seven thematic areas that inform building design, although only a subset of those are relevant for climate change including water, energy and materials considerations.