In the terrestrial and freshwater ecosystem sector, we assessed the feasibility of implementing EbA options in the CSA region. Given that EbA encompasses a wide range of projects, techniques and political and socioeconomic arrangements, extreme care should be taken when applying these general findings to particular cases. EbA can enhance food sovereignty and carbon stocks and foster SDGs by protecting and restoring ecosystems’ health and productivity. EbA is a strategy that frequently involves bottom-up decision-making and local communities’ empowerment and usually contributes to inequality reduction. EbA tends to benefit vulnerable groups, but aspects such as the impact on socioeconomic inequalities when implemented should be taken into account.In general, EbA does not require advanced technologies for local communities. However, limitations in technical assistance and funding for specific key technologies and training may act as a barrier for EbA adoption (medium confidence). EbA practices can reduce risk in several ways by increasing awareness among communities and providing food diversity and production. EbA is recognised as a desirable policy for most stakeholders in CSA, particularly because as a strategy it incorporates environmental and social concerns. Nonetheless, it is important that all stakeholders agree on the goals and methods for EbA to be effective. A lack of institutional coordination, clear goals and strategies were identified as a potential barrier for EbA implementation. EbA is heavily based in local and IK, as well as academic ecological knowledge.For the adaptation options analysed, significant barriers and mixed effects were observed for the institutional dimension, which indicates the relevance of the design and implementation of public policies and institutional arrangements for effective adaptation in the region. Considering the results, there is a need to advance initiatives, programmes and projects that facilitate adaptation to climate change. In the same way, barriers were apparent in the technological dimension, which indicates the importance of increasing access and diffusion of appropriate techniques and technologies in order to face the challenges of climate change in the region.