Climate-related migration, displacement and immobility in coming decades will coincide with global and regional demographic changes that will produce a widening distinction between high-income countries that have aging, slow-growing (or in some countries, shrinking) population numbers and low-income countries that have rapidly growing, youthful populations. Given this dynamic, coordinated national and international strategies that integrate migration and displacement considerations with wider adaptation and sustainable development policies may contribute to climate resilient development. Since AR5, the international community has established a number of agreements and initiatives that, with continued pursuit and implementation, would create potential for climate-related migration to be a positive contribution towards adaptive capacity-building and sustainable development more broadly (Warner, 2018).The 2018 Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration provides an important opportunity for planning for and responding to future climate-related migration and displacement (Kälin, 2018). Among its 23 objectives, the Compact explicitly encourages the international community to implement migration policies that facilitate voluntary migration and actively prepare for involuntary displacements due to climate change, especially in low- and middle-income countries. The Compact’s objectives include reducing barriers to legal and safe migration, and facilitating the freer flow of remittances between sending and receiving communities. By doing so the Compact aims to increase the potential for migration to make positive contributions to sustainable development and to adaptive capacity-building. It also contains specific provisions pertaining to climate- and disaster-related migration and displacement. Objective 2 of the Compact aims at reducing drivers of involuntary or low-agency migration and recommends that states establish systems for sharing information on environmental migration, develop climate adaptation and resilience strategies harmonised at sub-regional and regional levels, and cooperate on disaster risk prevention and response. Other objectives in the Compact relevant to climate-related migration include Objective 5 (increasing pathways for regular migration) and Objective 19 (facilitating migrants’ ability to contribute to sustainable development). Objective 18, which links migration with skills development, is consistent with the ‘migration with dignity’ approach to displacement risks (McNamara, 2015; Kupferberg, 2021). The 2018 Global Compact on Refugees observes that climate hazards increasingly interact with the drivers of refugee movements. The guidelines this Compact provides to governments regarding actions for addressing the causes of refugee movements and considerations for assisting and supporting refugees are useful for governments seeking guidance for all forms of displacement more generally, including displacement linked to climate change.Pursuant to the Paris Agreement, a task force was struck by the Warsaw International Mechanism to make recommendations to the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC on how to reduce the risks of climate-related displacement. Its 2018 report recommended that parties work towards development of national legislation, cooperate on research, strengthen preparedness, integrate mobility into wider adaptation plans, work towards safe and orderly migration, and provide assistance to people internally displaced for climate-related reasons. Such recommendations dovetail strongly with the objectives of the Compacts on Migration and Refugees as well as the Sendai Framework for DRR and the 2030 SDGs. The SDGs, which include multiple goals and targets in which migration plays an explicit role in fostering development (Nurse, 2019), may be seen as completing the international policy arrangements necessary for addressing future climate-related migration and displacement.