Severe risk is rarely driven by a single determinant (warming, exposure/vulnerability, adaptation), but rather by a combination of conditions that jointly produce the level of pervasiveness of consequences, irreversibility, thresholds, cascading effects, likelihood of consequences, temporal characteristics of risk and the systems’ ability to respond (medium to high confidence). In other words, climate risk is not a matter of changing CIDs only, but of the confrontation between changing CIDs and changing socio-ecological conditions.In most of the RKRs, severe risk for broadly applicable situations requires high levels of warming or exposure/vulnerability, or low adaptation. In many cases, it is associated with several of these conditions occurring simultaneously (e.g., high warming and high vulnerability). Examples include low-lying coastal areas (RKR-A; medium confidence), loss of livelihoods (RKR-D; medium confidence) or armed conflicts (RKR-H; low confidence).High warming and exposure/vulnerability combined with low adaptation is, however, not necessarily required to lead to severe risk, and various other sets of conditions can lead to such an outcome. For example:Without high levels of warming. T his is especially the case for terrestrial and marine ecosystems (RKR-B) and water security (RKR-G) for which even medium to low levels of warming will generate severe risk, depending on the processes considered (e.g., mass population-level mortality and ecological disruption for ecosystems). This is also the case when more specific situations are considered, for example in the case of (in)voluntary mobility of vulnerable populations with limited resources (RKR-H), and for some critical infrastructure in already highly exposed and vulnerable contexts (RKR-C).With high levels of adaptation. H igh levels of adaptation will not necessarily avoid severe risk, as is illustrated by the cases of coral-dependent and arctic coastal communities (RKR-A), some terrestrial and marine ecosystems (RKR-B), and water scarcity and the cultural uses of water (RKR-G).All RKR assessments indicate that risks are higher in high-vulnerability development pathways, and in some cases high vulnerability can occur in high-income societies. Examples include the possibility of increasing coastal settlement and the location of critical infrastructure in highly exposed locations (RKR-A, RKR-C), including to floods (RKR-G) and risks to terrestrial and marine ecosystems (RKR-B). The assessment therefore shows that, depending on socioeconomic trends especially in terms of equity, social justice and income sustainability, as well as on the ability to shift towards more climate-resilient economic and settlement systems (e.g., at the coast), higher-income societies also are at serious risk of being substantially affected in the decades to century to come.In terms of the time frames, most of the RKRs conclude that severe risks to many dimensions (ecosystems, health, etc.) are expected to occur by the end of the 21st century and across the globe. Some RKRs, however, highlight that severe risk could occur far earlier, for example as soon as a warming level of 1.5°C or 2°C is reached, which means potentially well before mid-century (IPCC, 2021). In some cases, risks are already considered severe, for example after major climatic events such as tropical storms (RKR-A).